

===== NEW DOCUMENT: CSCL UNIT 6.pdf - 2026-03-06T05:52:43.158Z =====

UNIT-V

Offences under the Cyberspace, 
Internet in India and Miscellaneous 
provisions of IT Act and Conclusions:
Some important offences under the
Cyberspace law and the Internet in India.
Other offences under the Information
Technology Act in India.
The role of Electronic Evidence and 
miscellaneous provisions of the IT Act

Some important offences under the Cyberspace law and the 
Internet in India:
Obscenity and Pornography on Cyberspace:
These days the Internet is very widely used by persons individually 
and group of persons and companies all over the world. With the 
frequent use of Internet in the form of blogging and websites we find 
that the trend has grown towards the use of 'face book' and the latest 
invention of 'twitter' for making one self popular as a celebrity and 
even for simple chatting by people. 
In spite of the fact that there are numerous and tremendous uses of the 
cyberspace and Internet we witness that many a times these are also 
being misused for criminal activities. 
We have observed recently that people are engaged in various kinds of 
criminal activities on the cyberspace and the Internet. We have also 
heard and observed that many young people particularly engage 
themselves in chatting on the Internet without knowing the identity of 
other persons with whom they are chatting. With the result, in many 
cases, the people using Internet are cheated, duped and mislead. 

Hacking on the Cyberspace and Internet:
The term 'Hacking' is connected with the unauthorized access to a 
computer system in which computer is the means as well as the 
target for committing the crime. 
These days the crime of hacking is becoming very popular and 
increasing very fast on the Internet. Hackers use the Internet to hack 
into remote computer system and commit data theft fraudulently 
destruct data or cause damage to the computer or the computer 
systems. 
Any person who destroys, alters any information contained in a 
computer resource or destroys computer system actually diminishes 
the value and utility of genuine data and affect harmfully or 
injuriously with either intention or knowledge to cause wrongful 
gain or wrongful loss to any person or the public commits the 
offence. Section 66 of the IT (Amendment) Act, 2008 is concerned 
with computer related offences which were under the IT Act, 2000, 
called hacking with thecomputer system. 

Under this Section of the IT Act, 2008 it is stated that: If any person, 
dishonestly or fraudulently does any act referred to in Section 43, 
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to three years or with fine which may extend five lakh 
rupees or with both. Explanation: For the purposes of this Section-
(a)
the word 'dishonestly' shall have the meaning assigned to it in 
Section24 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860);
(b) the word 'fraudulently' shall have the meaning assigned to it in 
Section25 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).
Other Offences-Computer Resource: 
Under Section 66A (i) any person who sends by means of a computer 
resource or a communication device:
(a)
Any information that is grossly offensive or has menacing 
character; or
(b) Any information which he knows to be false but for the purpose of 
causing annoyance, inconvenience, danger, obstruction insult, 

injury, criminal intimidation, enmity, hatred or ill will, persistently by 
making use of such computer resource or a communication device.
(c) Any electronic mail or electronic mail message for the purpose of 
causing annoyance inconvenience or to deceive or to mislead the 
addressee or recipient about the origin of such messages shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three 
years and with fine.
Facts of the Case: In 2012, Mumbai Police arrested two girls named 
Shaheen Dhada and Rinu Srinivasan for posting allegedly offensive & 
objectionable comments on Facebook against a bandh imposed on the 
death of the political leader of Shiv Sena founder Bal Thackeray. 
The police made the arrest under Section 66Aof the Information 
Technology Act 2000 which states that any person punishes any 
person who sends through a computer resource or communication 
device any information that is grossly offensive or with the knowledge 
of its falsity the information is transmitted for the purpose of causing 
annoyance, inconvenience, danger, insult, injury, hatred, or ill will.

Issues Raised in Case:
The petitioner in the present writ petition has challenged the 
constitutional validity of Section 66A of the Information 
Technology Act.  The petitioner challenged the constitutional 
validity of the act on the following grounds:
1. It infringes the fundamental right to free speech and expression and 
is not saved by any of the eight subjects covered in Article 19(2).
2. This section suffers from the vice of vagueness and without 
reasonable standards because of which the innocent persons are 
roped in as offenders.
3. The enforcement of the said section would be an insidious form of 
censorship that impairs a core value contained in Article 19(1)(a).
4. The said section infringes the rights of the individual under Articles 
14and 21 in as much there is no intelligible differentia between 
those who use the internet and those who by words spoken or 
written use theirmediums of communication.

Violation of the Right of Privacy on Cyberspace/Internet:
Privacy cannot be defined in an absolute fashion because it connotes 
different meanings and perceptions for different people. 
It is a kind of right of an individual or group to keep their lives out of public 
view in order to keep secret their personal affair. It is a kind of a claim by 
individuals, groups or institutions to determine for themselves as to how 
to what extent and when information about their lives and affairs may be 
communicated to others. The right to privacy as a human right has been 
recognized in Art. 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights 1950 
which reads as follows: Article 8.
()
Every one has the right to respect for his private and family life, his 
home and his correspondence.
(2) There shall be no interference by a public authority with the exercise of 
this right except such as is in accordance with the law and is necessary 
in a democratic society in the interests of national security, public safety 
or the economic well-being of the country, for the prevention of disorder 
or crime, for the protection of health or morals or for the protection of 
the rights and freedoms of others.

Punishment for Violation of Privacy, Breach of Confidentiality 
and Privacy under the IT Act:
 In the IT (Amendment) Act 2008 a new provision under the IT Act 
has been introduced for the purpose of punishment for violation of 
privacy. Under Section66E whoever intentionally or knowingly 
captures, publishes or transmits the image of a private area of any 
person without his or her consent under the circumstances violating 
the privacy of that person shall be punished with imprisonment 
which may extend to three years or with fine not exceeding two 
lakh rupees or with both. 
The above offence defined provides for meaning to various situations 
under the explanation which are as follows:
(a)
'transmit' means to electronically send a visual image with the 
intent that it be viewed by a person or persons;
(b) 'capture', with respect to an image, means to videotape, 
photograph, film or record by any means

(c) 'private area' means the naked or undergarments clad genitals, 
public area, buttocks or female breast;
d) 'publishes' means reproduction in the printed or electronic form and 
making it available for public;
(e) 'under circumstances violating privacy' means circumstances in 
which a person can have a reasonable expectation that-
(i)
he or she could disrobe in privacy, without being concerned that 
an image of his private area was being captured; or
(ii) any part of his or her private area would not be visible to the 
public, regardless of whether that person is in a public or private 
place.
Terrorism on Cyberspace/Internet:
In modern times terrorism as a means and method to cause fear and 
undue violence against individuals, groups or countries has posed 
a very menacing effect and as a big challenge in this world. 

The causes of terrorism in this world are numerous including 
religious, geographical and against particular countries by one 
country against the other countries. 
While terrorism  is a complicated complex and a very challenging 
task and is condemned by most of the people is almost all the 
countries in this world yet there is no unanimity among the people 
about the methods to regulate the phenomenon of terrorism in this 
world. 
In India with the amendment of IT (Amendment) Act, 2008, a new 
provision has been introduced for the punishment for Cyber 
Terrorism3 which provides-(1) Whoever:(a) With intent to threaten 
the unity, integrity, security or sovereignty of India or to strike 
terror in the people or any section of the people by-
Denying or causing the denial of access to any person authorized to 
access computer resource; or
Attempting to penetrate or access a computer resource without 
authorization or exceeding authorized access; 

Other offences under the Information Technology Act in India.
A Brief Overview of Cyber crimesThese days Information Technology 
(IT) is becoming increasingly popular and imminent in the day-to-
day life of individuals, companies and the society as a whole. This is 
because it has brought more efficiency, accuracy and speedier 
transactions particularly in business world. 
We find the popularity of data processing equipments and the use of 
computers in day-to-day transactions like online banking, 
telemarketing, use of credit or debit cards and so on, which have 
made banking very swift, and accurate. Such advances in the IT and 
the potentialities in the business world have attracted many misuses, 
unscrupulous people and criminals to commit many cyber crimes 
relating to financial world.
The cyber crime offenders befool people through the Internet using 
different techniques and schemes. And therefore, we find these days 
a new class of white collared criminals perpetuating fraud on the 
Internet. 

With various kinds of financial crimes on the cyberspace ranging from 
security frauds by altering information into a computer system or 
manipulating the programms for processing information and 
altering the output. 
Many frauds are being committed on the online auction trade. The 
Internet fraud commonly known as phishing where e-mails appear 
to be from legitimate online banking websites warn the recipients of 
a recent unauthorized purchase for their attention requiring urgent 
action. 
Such Internet fraud masters can create false identities about 
themselves and sell the information to equally dangerous third 
parties. Even Internet gambling is becoming popular. 
Digital forgery is done by creating document which the offender 
knows is not genuine and yet project the document as if it is 
genuine one by affixing somebody else's signature on the 
document. The Internet is also being used for sale of illegal things 
or articles which are prohibited in a country.

Offences by Intermediaries:
Under Section 67C of IT (Amendment) Act, 2008-(1) Intermediary 
shall preserve and retain such information as may be specified for 
such duration and in such manner and format as the Central 
Government may prescribe.
(2) Any intermediary who intentionally or knowingly contravenes the 
provisions of sub-section (1) shall be punished with an 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and also 
be liable to fine. The offence is also cognizable and billable under 
Section 77B of the Act.
(a) Exemption from Liability of Intermediary in Certain Cases. Under 
Chapter XII of the IT (Amendment) Act, 2008, Section 79 states-
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time 
being in force but subject to the provisions of sub-sections (2) and 
(3), an intermediary shall not be liable for any third party 
information, data, or communication link made available or hosted 
by him.

(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall apply if-(a) the function of 
the intermediary is limited to providing communication system over 
which information made available by third parties is transmitted or 
temporarily stored or hosted.
Explanation: For the purpose of this section, the expression 'third party 
information  means any information dealt with by an intermediary 
in his capacity as an intermediary.
Power of the Controller to Give Directions to Certifying 
Authorities:
The Controller under the Act has the power-(1) to may by order direct a 
CA or any employee of such Authority to take such measures or cease 
carrying on such activities as specified in the order by the Controller if 
those are necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this 
Act, rules or any regulations made there under.(2) Any person who 
intentionally or knowingly fails to comply with any order under sub-
section (1) shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable on 
conviction to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years or a 
fine not exceeding one lakh rupees or both.

Power to Issue Directions for Interception or Monitoring or 
Decryption of Information:
Under Section 69 of the IT (Amendment) Act, 2008-(1) Where the 
Central Government or State Government or any of its officers 
specially authorized by the Central Government or the State 
Government, if satisfied that it is necessary or expedient do in the 
interest of the sovereignty or integrity of India, defense of India, 
security of the State friendly relations with foreign States or public 
order or for preventing incitement to the commission of any 
cognizable offence relating to above or for investigation of any 
offence it may subject to the provisions of sub-section 
(2), for reasons to be recorded in writing, by order, direct any agency 
of the appropriate government to intercept, monitor or decrypt or 
cause to be intercepted or monitored or decrypted any information 
generated, transmitted, received or stored in any computer resource.

Power to Issue Directions for Blocking for Public Access of any 
Information: Section 69A of the IT (Amendment) Act 2008 
provides-
()
Where the Central Government or any of its officer specially 
authorized by it in this behalf is satisfied that it is necessary or 
expedient to do so in the interest of sovereignty and integrity of 
India defense of India security of State, friendly relations with 
foreign States or public order or for preventing incitement to the 
commission of any cognizable offence relating to above, it may 
subject to the provisions of sub-section 
(
2)for reasons to be recorded in writing, by order, direct any agency of 
the Government or intermediary to block for access by the public or 
cause to be blocked for access by the public any information 
generated transmitted, received, stored or hosted in any computer 
resource. (2) The procedure and safeguards subject to which such 
blocking for access by the public may be carried out shall be such as 
may be prescribed.

Power to Authorize to Monitor and Collect Traffic Data or 
Information for Cyber Security: In Section 69B of the IT 
(Amendment) Act 2008 provides-(1) The Central Government may, 
to enhance cyber security and for identification, analysis and 
prevention of intrusion or spread of computer contaminant in the 
country by notification in the Official Gazette authorize any agency 
of the Government to monitor and collect traffic data or information 
generated, transmitted, received or stored in any computer resource.
(2) The intermediary or any person in-charge of the computer resource 
shall when called upon by the agency which has been authorized 
under sub-section (1) provide technical assistance and extend all 
facilities to such agency to enable online access or to secure and 
provide online access to the computer resource generating, 
transmitting, receiving or storing such traffic data or information.
(3) The procedure and safeguards for monitoring and collecting traffic 
dataor information, shall be such as may be prescribed.  

Offences Relating to Protected System: 
Section 70 as amended by the IT (Amendment) Act 2008 provides-(1) The 
appropriate Government may by notification in the Official Gazette declare 
any computer resource which directly or indirectly affects the facility of 
Critical Information Infrastructure, to be a protected system.
Explanation: For the purposes of this section, 'Critical Information 
Infrastructure' means the computer resource, the incapacitation or 
destruction of which, shall have debilitating impact on national security, 
economy, public health or safety.
(2) The appropriate government may, by order in writing, authorize the 
persons who are authorized to access protected systems notified under sub-
section (1).
(3) Any person who secures access or attempts to secure access to a protected 
system in contravention of the provisions of this section shall be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten 
years and shall also be liable to fine.
(4) The Central Government shall prescribe the information security practices 
and procedures for such protected system.

The Offence of Misrepresentation: Under Section 71 as amended by 
the IT (Amendment) Act 2008, it is provided that any person who 
makes any misrepresentation to or suppresses any material fact 
from the Controller or the CA for obtaining any license or 
Electronic Signature Certificate, as the case may be, shall be 
punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two 
years, or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees or with 
both.
Offence of Publishing Electronic Signature Certificate with False 
Particulars: 
Section 73 as amended by the IT (Amendment) Act, 
2008, provides-(1) No person shall publish a Electronic Signature 
Certificate or other wise make it available to any other person with the 
knowledge that-(a) The Certifying Authority listed in the certificate 
has not issued it. or(b) The subscriber listed in the certificate has not 
accepted it. or(c) The certificate has been revoked or suspended, unless 
such publication is for the purpose of verifying a electronic signature 
created prior to such suspension or revocation

Confiscation as Penalty for Contravention of the Provisions of the 
Act:  Under Section 76 of the IT Act, if any computer, computer  
system, floppies, compact disks, tape drives or any other 
accessories related thereto, in respect of which any provision of this 
Act rules orders or regulations made there under has been or is 
being contravened shall be liable to confiscation.
Provided that where it is established to the satisfaction of the court 
adjudicating the confiscation that the person in whose possession, 
power or control of any such computer, computer system, floppies, 
compact disks tape drives or any other accessories relating thereto 
is found, is not responsible for the contravention of the provisions 
of this Act, rules, orders, or regulations made there under the court 
may, instead of making an order for confiscation of such computer, 
computer system, floppies, compact disks, tape drives or any other 
accessories related thereto, make such other order authorized by 
this Act against the person contravening the provisions of this Act, 
rules, orders, or regulations made there under as it may think fit.

Compounding of Offences under the IT Act: Under Section 77A of 
the IT (Amendment) Act, 2008-(1) A court of competent 
jurisdiction may compound offences other than the offences for 
which the punishment for life or imprisonment for a term exceeding 
three years has been provided under this Act: Provided that the 
court shall not compound such offence where the accused is, by 
reason of his previous conviction, liable to either enhanced 
punishment or to a punishment of a different kind: Provided further 
that the court shall not compound any offence where such offence 
affects the socio-economic conditions of the country or has been 
committed against a child below the age of 18 years or a woman.(2) 
The person accused of an offence under this Act may file an 
application for compounding in the court in which offence is 
pending for trial and the provisions of Sections 265B and 265C of 
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 shall apply.

Cognizance of Offences and Bail under the IT Act: 
Under Section 77B of the IT (Amendment) Act, 2008, notwithstanding 
anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, an 
offence punishable with imprisonment of three years and above 
shall be cognizable and the offence punishable with imprisonment 
of three years shall be boilable.
Punishment for Abetment and Attempt to Commit Offences under 
the IT Act: Under Section 84B of the IT (Amendment) Act 2008, 
any person who abets any offence shall, if the act abetted is 
committed in consequence of the abetment, and no express 
provision is made by this Act for the punishment of such abetment, 
be punished with the punishment provided for the offence under 
this Act.
Explanation: An act or offence is said to be committed in consequence 
of abetment when it is committed in consequence of the instigation, 
or in pursuance of the conspiracy or with the aid which constitutes 
the abetment.

Commission of Offences by Companies under the IT Act: Under 
Section 85 of the Information Technology Act, 2000-(1) Where a 
person committing a contravention of any of the provisions of this 
Act or any rule, direction or order made there under is a company 
every person who, at the time the contravention was committed, 
was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the 
conduct of business of the company as well as the company, shall 
be guilty of the contravention and shall be liable to be proceeded 
against and punished accordingly. Provided that nothing contained 
in this sub-section shall render any such person liable to 
punishment if he proves that the contravention took place without 
his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent such 
contravention.

The Power of Police Officer and other Officers to Enter and 
Search: Under Section 80 of the IT (Amendment) Act, 2008, it is 
provided that-(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code 
of Criminal Procedure 1973 any police officer, not below the rank 
of a Inspector, or any other officer of the Central Government or a 
State Government authorized by the Central Government in this 
behalf may enter any public place and search and arrest without 
warrant any person found therein who is reasonably suspected of 
having committed or of committing or of being about to commit 
any offence under this Act. 
Explanation: For the purposes of this sub-section, the expression 
'public place' includes any public conveyance, any hotel, any shop 
or any other place intended for use by, or accessible to the public.
Protection of Action Taken in a Good Faith: Section 84 of the IT 
(Amendment) Act, 2008 provides that no suit, prosecution or other 
legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government, the State 
Government, the Controller or any person acting on behalf of him, 

The Chairperson, Members, Adjudicating officers and the staff of the Cyber 
Appellate Tribunal for anything which in good faith done or intended to 
be done in pursuance of this Actor any rule, regulation or order made 
there under.
Some Amendments Made under the Indian Penal Code by IT 
(Amendment) Act 2008: 
Part III of the IT (Amendment) Act, 2008, 
provides for the following Amendments of the Indian Penal Code, 
1860.(i) After the amendment by the Information Technology 
(Amendment)Act, 2008, Section 4 of the Indian Penal Code provides. The 
provisions of this Code apply also to any offence committed by:-(1) any 
citizen of India in any place without and beyond India,(2) any person on 
any ship or aircraft registered in India wherever it may be;(3) any person 
in any place without and beyond India committing offence targeting a 
computer resource located in India. Explanation: In this section-(a) The 
word 'offence' includes every act committed outside India which,if 
committed in India, would be punishable under this code;(b) The 
expression 'computer resource' shall have the meaning assigned to it in 
clause (k) of sub-section (1) of Section 2 of the Information Technology 
Act, 2000.

The role of Electronic Evidence and miscellaneous 
provisions of the IT Act:
Indian Evidence Act: In criminal law, for an offender to be convicted 
for an offence, proper and sufficient evidence is needed to prove the 
offence. The Indian Evidence Act,1872 provides for the proper and 
effective provisions for the purposes of relevant evidence to be 
produced before a court of law for the conviction of an offender. 
The original Indian Evidence Act, 1872, provided for only 
provisions for or a land documentary evidence in the physical form. 
However, the popularity of cyberspace and internet has necessitated 
to provide for the inclusion of electronic form of evidence on the 
Internet and cyberspace. Therefore, the Indian Evidence Act 1872, 
has been amended to suitably include electronic form of evidence 
asrelevant and proper to prove before a court of law.

Examiner of Electronic Evidence: Under Chapter XII-A of IT 
(Amendment) Act, 2008 in Section 79A it is provided that-The 
Central Government may, for the purposes of providing expert 
opinion on electronic form evidence before any court or other 
authority specify by notification in the Official Gazette, any 
department, body or agency of the Central Government or a State 
Government as an Examiner of Electronic Evidence.
Amendments Introduced in the Indian Evidence Act 1872:
In part IV of the IT (Amendment) Act 2008 the following amendments 
have been made in the Indian Evidence Act 1872:
(i) In Section 3, of the Indian Evidence Act 1872 by part IV of the 
Information Technology (Amendment) Ac 2008 in the last 
paragraph of the section has been amended by substituting 
electronic signature and electronic signature certificate respectively 
for the words digital signature and digital signature certificate. 

(ii) By the amendment Act of 2008 Section 45A has been introduced in the 
Indian Evidence Act 1872. Section 45A states that when in a proceeding 
the court has to form an opinion on any matter relating to any information 
transmitted or stored in any computer resource or any other electronic or 
digital form, the opinion of the Examiner of Evidence referred to in 
Section 79A of the Information Technology Act 2000 is a relevant fact. 
(iii) Section 47A has been amended by the IT Act 2008 which states when 
the Court has to form an opinion as to the electronic signature of any 
person the opinion of the Certifying Authority which has issued the 
Electronic Signature Certificate is a relevant fact.
(iv) Section 67A as amended by the IT Act 2008 provides that except in the 
case of a secure electronic signature, if the electronic signature of any 
subscriber is alleged to have been affixed to an electronic record the fact 
that such electronic signature is the electronic signature of the subscriber 
must be proved.
(v) Section 85A as amended provides that the court shall presume that every 
electronic record purporting to be an agreement containing the electronic 
signature of the parties was so concluded by affixing the electronic 
signature of the parties.

Understanding Evidentiary Value of Electronic Records: Section 
65 A and Section 65-B of the Indian Evidence Act 1872:
Keeping in view the exponential growth of technology and 
involvement of digital gadgets in the commission of crimes. the 
understanding of evidentiary values of electronic evidences 
occupies an important place. 
In an effort to keep the evidence processes up-to-date and to enable 
Indian courts to deal with technological advances, the Indian 
Evidence Act 1872 (hereafter 'TEA') has been amended and 
Sections 65A and 65B have been inserted to include the validation 
of electronic evidence.
 In many cases a computer or digital camera (used to create or store 
electronic records) itself is not presented in court as evidence. 
Generally a printout is taken or CDs/ DVDs are prepared to be 
produced as secondary evidence before the court in place of 
primary evidence. 

2 Thereafter as per Sections 65A and 65B the functionality of such 
computer needs to be established and the person who has 
transferred these photographs and produced them needs to certify.
3 The Sections 65A and 65B of the Indian Evidence Act1872 as 
mentioned below states the evidentiary values of electronic 
evidence in the eyes of law.
65A. Special provisions as to evidence relating to an electronic record. 
–The contents of electronic records may be proved under the 
provisions of Section 65B.
65B. Admissibility of electronic records-
(1) 
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, any information 
contained in an electronic record which is printed on a paper, stored, 
recorded or in optical or magnetic media produced by a computer 
(hereinafter referred to as the computer output) shall be deemed to be 
also a document if the conditions mentioned in this section are 
satisfied in relation to the information and computer in question and 
shall be admissible in any proceedings without further proof or

 production of the original, as evidence or any contents of the original or of 
any fact stated therein of which direct evidence would be admissible.
(2) The conditions referred to in sub-section : in respect of a computer output 
shall be the following, namely: the computer output containing the 
information was produced by the computer during the period over which 
the computer was used regularly to store or process information for the 
purposes of any activities regularly carried on over that period by the 
person having lawful control over the use of the computer.
(b) during the said period, information of the kind contained in the electronic 
record or of the kind from which the information so contained is derived 
was regularly fed into the computer in the ordinary course of the said 
activities.
(c) throughout the material part of the said period, the computer was 
operating properly or, if not, then in respect of any period in which it 
was not operating properly or was out of operation during that part of 
the period, was not such as to affect the electronic record or the accuracy 
of its contents; and(d) the information contained in the electronic record 
reproduces or is derived from such information fed into the computer in 
the or dinarycourse of the said activities.

The Appointment of National Nodal Agency:
 Under Section 70A as inserted by the IT (Amendment) Act 2008 the 
Central Government may be notification published in the Official 
Gazette designate any organization of the government as the 
national nodal agency in respect of Critical Information 
Infrastructure Protection. 
The national nodal agency shall be responsible for all measure 
including Research and Development relating to protection of 
critical information infrastructure. 
The duties and the manner of performing functions by the nodal 
agency shall be as prescribed by the government.
Indian Computer Emergency Response Team
Under Section 70B as introduced by the Information Technology 
(Amendment)Act, 2008-the Central Government shall appoint by 
notification in the Official Gazette an agency of the Government to 
serve as national agency for incident response team. The Central 
Government shall provide with a Director-General ands uch other

officers and employees as may be prescribed by the Government.....
(4) The Indian Computer Emergency Response Team shall serve as 
the national agency for performing the following functions in the 
area of cyber security:
(a)
collection, analysis and dissemination of information on cyber 
incidents.
(b) forecast and alerts of cyber security incidents.
(c) emergency measures for handling cyber security incidents.
(d) coordination of cyber incidents response activities.
(e) issue guidelines, advisories, vulnerability notes and whitepapers 
relating to information security practices, procedures, prevention, 
response and reporting of cyber incidents.
(f) such other functions relating to cyber security as may be 
prescribed.
Law Regarding Electronic Cheques and Truncated Cheques: 
Under the IT Act electronic cheques are now recognized as valid

Negotiable instrument. Section 81A as inserted by the IT Act 2008 
lays down that the provisions of this Act shall apply to the 
electronic cheques and the truncated cheques subject to such 
modifications and amendments as may be necessary for carrying 
out the purposes of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881, by the 
Central Government, in consultation with the Reserve Bank of 
India, by notification in the Official Gazette.
The Information Technology Act to have Overriding Effect:
Under Section 81 of this Act, it is provided that this Act shall have 
effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in 
any other law for the time being in force. Provided that nothing 
contained in this Act shall restrict any person from exercising any 
right conferred under the Copyright Act 1957 or the Patents 
Act1970.
The above section provides that the provisions of this Act shall have 
the overriding effect on any other law except the offences which are 
not covered by the provision of this Act. And no person shall be

barred to exercise his right conferred under the Copyright Act 1957 or 
the Patents Act 1970.
Section 83 of the IT Act empowers the Central Government to give 
directions to any State Government as to the carrying into execution 
in the State of any of the provisions of this Act or any rule 
regulation or order made there under. And therefore the Central 
Government has been given the power to give directions to the 
State Government to implement the object, the provisions and the 
rules or regulations or orders made under the IT Act.
Power of Central Government to Make Rules under the Act:
Under Section 87 of the IT Act-(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette and in the electronic Gazette 
make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(3) Every notification made by the Central Government under sub-
section (1)of Section 70A and every rule made by the Central 
Government shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before 
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of

thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive session, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule 
or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modification or annulment shall 
be without prejudice to the validity of anything modified form or be 
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
previously done under that notification or rule.
Constitution of Advisory Committee: 
Under Section 88 of the IT Act it is provided that-(1) The Central 
Government shall as soon as may be after the commencement of 
this Act constitute a Committee called the Cyber Regulations 
Advisory Committee.
(2) The Cyber Regulations Advisory Committee shall consists of a 
Chairperson and such number of other official and non-official 
members representing the interest principally affected or having

Special knowledge of the subject-matter as the Central Government 
may deem fit.
(3) The Cyber Regulations Advisory Committee shall advise the-
(a)
Central Government either generally as regards any rules or for 
any other purpose connected with this Act
(b) Controller in framing the regulations under this Act.
Powers of the Controller and the State Government to Make 
Rules: Under Section 89, of the IT Act, 2000, the Controller may 
after consultation with the Cyber Regulation Advisory Committee 
and with the previous approval of the Central Government by 
notification in the Official Gazette make regulations consistent with 
this Act and the rules made there under to carry out the purposes of 
this Act. The matters on which regulations may provide for are 
given in Appendix I of this work. Under Section 90, the State 
Government has the power to make rules which provides that-(1) 
The State Government may by notification in the Official Gazette 
make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.

2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the 
following matters:
(a)
The electronic form in which filing, issue, grant, receipt or 
payment shall be effected under sub-section (1) of Section 6.(b) 
Matters specified in sub-section (2) of Section 6.
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this section shall 
be laid as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of the 
State Legislature where it consists of two Houses or where such 
Legislature consists of one House before that House.
Reasonable Security Practices and Procedures andSensitive 
Personal Information Rules 2011: In exercise of the powers 
conferred by clause (ob) of sub-section (2) of Section87 read with 
Section 43A of the IT Act 2000 the Central Government has made 
the IT (Reasonable security practices and procedures and sensitive 
personal information) Rules 2011. In Rule 3 of the above said rules 
sensitive personal data or information of a person shall

include information collected, received, stored, transmitted or 
processed by body corporate or intermediary or any person 
consisting of the following:
• Password
• User details as provided at the time of registration or thereafter
• Information related to financial matters such as Bank account/credit 
card/debit card/other payment instrument details of the users
• Physiological and mental health condition
• Medical records and history. Biometric information
• Information received by body corporate for processing, stored or 
processed under the lawful contract or otherwise. 
•
Call data records.
Provided that any information that is freely available or accessible in public 
domain or accessible under the Right to Information Act, 2005 or any 
other law for the time being in force shall not be regarded as sensitive 
personal data or information for purposes of these rules.

Concluding Remarks:
In India there has been a phenomenon success of the IT industry 
through its varied software programmers for the upliftment of 
society in general and the industrial growth in particular. 
The IT industry in India has engaged itself for providing outsourcing 
services to various countries in the world including the European 
countries and the US. India's software industry with the Indian IT 
firms being very good with the talent employed should be able to 
use their strength of talent to transform Indian society in education, 
healthcare, provide clean water and solve a lot of other social and 
economic problem of the Indian society. 
Sam Palmisano, the Chairman and CEO of IBM is of the opinion that 
India had a tremendous amount of intellectual capital which can 
transform the society dependent on how much of it is prioritized 
according to society's requirements.

===== NEW DOCUMENT: CSCL UNIT 5.pdf - 2026-03-06T05:52:47.173Z =====

UNIT-V

Penalties and Compensation: 
  Penalties, Compensation 
and Adjunction of 
violations of provisions of 
IT Act 2000 and judicial 
review

The Indian law concerning Cyberspace and Internet is covered under 
the IT Act, it provides for basically two types of penalties for 
violation of the provisions of IT Act. 
Civil liability of damages or compensation. 
Criminal liability as punishment for the commission of offences in the 
form of either imprisonment or fine or both for the commission of 
offences by the offenders.
Penalty and Compensation for Damage to Computer or Computer 
System:
Under Section 43 of the IT Act, it has been provided that if any person 
without permission of the owner or any other person who is in 
charge of a computer or computer system or computer network:
(a)
accesses such computer, computer system or computer network or 
computer resource.
(b)
(b) downloads, copies or extracts any data, computer database or 
information from such computer or computer system, or computer

network, information or data held or stored in any removable storage 
medium.
(c) introduces or causes to be introduced any computer contaminant or 
computer virus.
(d) damages or causes to be damaged any computer or computer 
system or network, data, computer database or any other computer 
program.
(e) disrupts or causes disruption of any computer system or computer 
network.
(f) denies or causes the denial of access any person authorized to 
access.
(g) provides any assistance to any person to facilitate access to a 
computer system or computer network in contravention of the 
provisions of this Act.
(h) charges the services availed of by a person to the account of 
another person by tampering or manipulating any computer, system 
or network

(i)
destroys, deletes or alters any information residing in a computer 
resource or diminishes its value or utility or affects it injuriously 
by any means;
(j) steal, conceals, destroys or alters or causes any person to steal, 
conceal, destroys or alter any computer source code used for a 
computer resource with an intention to cause damage, that person 
shall be liable to pay damages by way of compensation not 
exceeding one crorer rupees to the person so affected.
Section 43 thus provides for the explanation to the above Section 
which defines:
(i)
computer contaminant
(ii) computer database
(iii) computer virus
(iv) computer damage
(v) computer source code.

Compensation for Failure to Protect Data:
Where a body corporate, possessing, dealing or handling any sensitive 
personal data or information in a computer resource which it owns, 
controls and operates is negligent in implementing and maintaining 
reasonable security practices and procedures and thereby causes 
wrongful loss or wrongful gain to any person such body corporate 
shall be liable to pay damages by the way compensation to the 
person so affected. 
In Explanation to Section 43A of the IT Act provides for the 
definitions.
(i)
body corporate.
(ii) reasonable security practices and procedures.
(iii) sensitive personal data or information.

Penalty for Failure to Furnish Information, Return or any Other 
Penalty: If any person who is required under this Act or any rules 
or regulations made there under to:
(a)
furnish any document, return or report to the Controller or the 
Certifying Authority fails to furnish the same, he shall be liable to 
a penalty not exceeding one lakh and fifty thousand rupees for 
each such failure.
(b) file any return or furnish any information, books or other 
documents with in the time specified there for in the regulations 
fails to file return or furnish the same within the time specified 
there for in the regulations, he shall be liable to a penalty not 
exceeding five thousand rupees for everyday during which such 
failure continues.
(c) maintain books of account or records, fails to maintain the same, he 
shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding then ten thousand rupees 
for every day during which the failure continues.

Adjudication of Disputes under the IT Act:
The adjudication has been provided for
()
whether any person has committed a contravention of any of the 
provisions of this Act or of any rule, regulation, direction or order 
made there under which renders him liable to pay penalty or 
compensation the Central Government shall subject to provisions 
of sub-section (3),appoint any officer not below the rank of a 
Director to the Government of India or equivalent officer of a State 
Government to be an adjudicating officer for holding an enquiry in 
the manner prescribed by the Central Government. 
(1A)The adjudicating officer appointed under sub-section (1) shall 
exercise jurisdiction to adjudicate matters in which the claim for 
injury or damage does not exceed rupees five crore.
Every adjudicating officer shall have the powers of a civil court which 
areconferred on the Appellate Tribunal under the Sub-Section (2) 
of Section 58 ofthe IT Act.

a)
all proceeding before the adjudicating officer shall be deemed to 
be judicial proceedings within the meaning of Sections 193 and 
228 of the Indian Penal Code.
(b) and deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of Sections 345 and 
346 of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973.
(c) and shall also be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of 
Order XXI of the Civil Procedure Code.
The adjudicating officer adjudging quantum of compensation under 
Chapter IX of this Act shall have due regard to-
(a)
the amount of gain of unfair advantage, wherever quantifiable 
made as a result of the default.
(b) the amount of loss caused to any person as a result of the default.
(c) the repetitive nature of the default.

The Appellate Tribunal (AT):
Sections. 48 to 64 of Chapter X of IT Act contain the various 
provisions relating to appellate tribunal. 
It is significant to note that Cyber Appellate Tribunal the body which 
existed earlier under the Information Technology Act, 2000 has 
been merged with the Appellate Tribunal that is the Telecom 
Dispute Settlement and Appellate Tribunal (TDSAT) under the 
Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997 by Finance Act 
2017. 
Sections 49, 50, 51, 52, 52A, 52B, 52C,53, 54 and 56 of Chapter X of 
Information Technology Act have been omitted by Finance Act 
2017. 
Provisions relating to Appellate Tribunal are explained below:

The Appellate Tribunal Sec. 48(1):
The Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Tribunal 
established under Sec.14 of the Telecom Regulatory Authority 
of India Act, 1997, 
as per Part XIVof Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017, w.e.f. 
26/05/2017, be the Appellate Tribunal for the purposes of this 
Act and the said Appellate Tribunal shall exercise the 
jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred on it by or under 
this Act. 
The Central Government shall specify, by notification, the 
matters and places in relation to which the Appellate Tribunal 
may exercise jurisdiction.
(ii) The Appellate Tribunal (Qualifications, Experience and other 
Conditions of Service of Members) shall be as per the 
Appellate Tribunal Rules, 2017 (w.e.f.1/6/17).

Appeal to Appellate Tribunal (AT) (Sec. 57):
An appeal is a request made by the aggrieved party to modify or 
reverse an order, Appeals function both as a process for error 
correction and a process of clarifying and interpreting law. Any 
person aggrieved by an order made by controller or adjudicating 
officer under this Act may prefer an appeal to AT [Sec. 57(1)].
On receipt of an appeal under Section 57(1), the Appellate Tribunal 
may after giving an opportunity of being heard to the parties to the 
appeal pass such orders there on as it thinks fit. 
It may confirm, modify or set aside the order against which an appeal 
has been made [Sec. 57(4)). The Appellate Authority shall send a 
copy of every order made by it to: 
(i)
the parties to appeal, and (ii)the concerned controller or 
adjudicating officer [Sec. 57(5)]. The appeal shall be dealt with by 
it as expeditiously as possible and endeavor shall be made by it to 
dispose of the appeal finally within 6 months from the date of 
receipt of theappeal [Sec. 57(6)].

Procedure of AT [Sec. 58(1)]:
The Appellate Tribunal shall not be bound by the procedure laid down 
by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. However, it shall be guided 
by the principles of natural Justice and subject to the other 
provisions of this Act and of any rules the Appellate Tribunal shall 
have powers to regulate its own procedure including the place at 
which it shall have its sittings.
Powers of AT [Sec. 58(2)]:
The Appellate Tribunal shall have for the purposes of discharging its 
functions under this Act, the same powers as are vested in a Civil 
Court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. 
These are as follows:
(a)
summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and 
examining him on oath.
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents or other 
electronic records.
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits.

(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or 
documents.
(e) reviewing its decisions.
(f) dismissing an application for default or deciding it ex-parte.
(g) any other matter which may be prescribed.
Right to Make Legal Representation (Sec. 59):
The appellant may either appear in person or authorize one or more 
legal practitioners or any of its officers to present his or its case 
before the Appellate Tribunal.
Civil Court not to Have Jurisdiction (Sec. 61):
No Civil Court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or 
proceeding in respect of any matter which an adjudicating officer or 
the Appellate Tribunal is empowered to determine under this Act. 
No court shall grant injunction in respect of any action taken or to 
be taken in pursuance of any power conferred by or under this Act.

Appeal to High Court (Sec. 62):
Any person aggrieved by any decision or order of Appellate Tribunal 
may file an appeal to the High Court within 60 days from the date 
of communication of such decision or order. 
An appeal may be on any question of fact or law arising out of such 
order. The High Court may allow it to be filed within a further 
period of 60 days if it is satisfied that sufficient cause prevented 
him from filing the appeal with in the prescribed period.
Compounding of Contraventions and Recovery of Penalty or 
Compensation:
Any contravention under this Act either before or after the institution 
of Adjudication proceedings may be compounded by the Controller 
or any other officer who is specifically authorized by him or by the 
Adjudicating officer subject to such condition as the Controller or 
such other officer or the Adjudicating officer may specify: 
Provided that such sum shall not in any case, exceed the maximum 
amount of the penalty which may be imposed under this Act for

the contravention so compounded. However, the above proviso shall 
not apply to a person who commits the same or similar 
contravention within a period of three years from the date on 
which the first contravention, committed by him was 
Compounded.  
Any second or subsequent contravention committed after the expiry 
of a period of three years from the date on which the contravention 
was Previously compounded shall be deemed to be a first 
contravention. Moreover , no proceeding or further proceeding 
shall be taken against the person guilty of such contravention in 
respect of the contravention so compounded.
The word 'compound' used in this section means agreeing for 
considerations not to prosecute a person. Compounding an offence 
means abstaining from prosecuting the person of any offence or 
crime in question29. Moreover, according to the proviso of this 
section, the maximum amount of penalty or compensation which 
can be compoundable under this Act is Rupees one crore.  

Appeal to the High Court under the IT Act, and Judicial Review 
under the Constitution of India:
(i) Under the IT Act, any person aggrieved by any decision or order of 
the Appellate Tribunal may file an appeal to the High Court within 
sixty days from the date of communication of the decision or order 
of the Appellate Tribunal to him on any question of fact or law 
arising out of such order: Provided the High Court may, if it is 
satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from 
filing the appeal within the said period allow it to be filed within a 
further period not exceeding sixty days. This means that the High 
Court has been given the authority of second appeal as against the 
orders of the first appeal before the Appellate Tribunal under the IT 
Act. In the above provision of the IT Act, the expression 'sufficient‘ 
within the meaning of Section 5 of the Limitation Act, 1963 or 
Order 22, Rule9 of the CPC or any other similar provision should 
receive a liberal construction so as to advance substantial justice 
when no negligence or want of bona fides is imputable to a party. 

(ii) Under Article 226 of the Constitution of India every High Court 
shall have powers throughout the territories in relation to which it 
exercises jurisdiction to issue to any person or authority, including 
in appropriate cases, any Government, within those territories 
directions, orders or writs, including writs in the nature of 
mandamus, prohibition and certiorari in respect of any orders 
against the Controller or the Adjudicating officer or the Appellate 
Tribunal under this Act for the enforcement of any of the rights 
conferred by Part III and for any other purposes. 
The power conferred on a High Court by Article 226 of the 
Constitution shall not be in derogation of the power conferred on 
the Supreme Court by clause(2) of Article 32 of the Constitution 
33 The powers conferred upon the High Court under Article 226 of 
the Constitution are discretionary in nature which can be invoked 
for the enforcement of any fundamental right or legal right but not 
for more contractual rights arising out of an agreement particularly 
in view of the existence of efficacious alternative remedy. 

The Constitutional Court should insist upon the party to avail the same 
instead of invoking the extraordinary writ jurisdiction of the High 
Court.
It is emphasized by the Court that there is need to avoid arbitrariness by 
administrative authority in spheres where the relevant statute does not 
lay down any quasi judicial obligation. It has been held by the Court 
that the grounds for issuing writs of certiorari and prohibition are as 
under follows:
• 
Where there is a defect of jurisdiction it attracts certiorari. But certiorari 
would not lie because the decision of a tribunal on a subject matter within 
a jurisdiction is considered to be wrong.
• The principles of natural justice are not inflexible and may differ in 
different circumstances.
A writ of certiorari can be issued for correcting errors of jurisdiction 
committed by inferior courts or tribunals. A writ can be issued wherein 
exercise of jurisdiction conferred on it the court or tribunal acts illegally 
or improperly.

•
The writ of certiorari will be issued if there is an error of law apparent 
on the face of the record or if tribunal acts without sufficient evidence 
or misdirects itself in considering the evidence. 
•
A writ petition cannot succeed if its factual basis is not established. In 
a Calcutta case the petitioner sought inspection of his answer scripts at 
a particular examination on the ground that he had reason to believe 
that his answer scripts were missing. However, existence of the answer 
scripts was proved from the order of the Controller of Examinations. It 
was held that writ could not be issued.
(iii) 
Under Article 227 of the Constitution of India, every High Court shall 
have superintendence over all courts and tribunals throughout the territories 
in relation to which it exercises jurisdiction. Without prejudice to the 
generality of the foregoing provisions, the High Court may:
•
 call for returns from such courts;
•  make and issue general rules and prescribe forms for regulating the 
practice and proceedings of such courts; and
• prescribe forms in which books, entries and accounts shall be kept by the 
officers of any such courts

(iv) Under Article 32 of the Constitution of India the right to move the 
Supreme Court by appropriate proceedings for the enforcement of 
the remedies under this Article is guaranteed. 
The Supreme Court shall have the power to issue directions or orders 
or writs including writs in the nature of mandamus, prohibition and 
certiorari whichever may be appropriate for the enforcement of any 
of the right conferred by this Part.
A writ of certiorari may be issued by the Supreme Court where the law 
under which the decision was given is void. And a writ of certiorari 
may also be issued where a decision itself violates a fundamental 
right or the decision violates the law or is without jurisdiction. 
Moreover, a writ of certiorari can be issued by the Supreme Court 
where the decision is against natural justice, mala fide, perverse or 
based on non-applicability of a venue.
(v) Under Article 136 of the Constitution of India the Supreme Court 
may in its discretion, grant special leave to appeal from any 
Judgment, decree, determination, sentence or order in any case or

matter passed or made by any court or tribunal in the territory of India. 
Under this Article apart from above remedies discussed there can also 
be a special leave to appeal against the order or Judgment of the 
Appellate Tribunal under the Constitution of India. 
under Article 136 may be exercised against an order passed by any 
tribunal. This jurisdiction is not subject to any condition that the 
party who seeks special leave of the Supreme Court to appeal from 
such order is to exhaust all his remedies including petition under 
Article 226.
The Supreme Court would not allow a new point (which was not taken 
or not pressed before the High Court) to be raised before it or which 
was sought to be introduced by filing additional grounds. Where the 
point could have been urged before the High Court under Articles 
226 or 227, the Supreme Court would not permit the appellant to 
raise it for the first time before it not to assail an undertaking given 
by him in the High Court. 

It has been held by the Supreme Court that where the judgment is 
tainted with serious legal infirmities or is founded on a legal 
construction which is wrong, the special leave may be granted. Also 
it has been held by the Supreme Court that a petition for special 
leave would be granted where approach of the court whose 
judgment is under appeal is wrong in law.

===== NEW DOCUMENT: ECM Course File - III & IV Year Syllabus.pdf - 2026-03-06T05:52:51.616Z =====

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
1
COURSESTRUCTURE
AND
DETAILEDSYLLABUS
for
B.TechFourYearDegreeCourse
(A-22III&IVyear)
in
ELECTRONICSANDCOMPUTER
ENGINEERING
(ECM)
(Applicableforthebatchesadmittedfrom2022-2023)
SREENIDHIINSTITUTEOFSCIENCEANDTECHNOLOGY
(AnAutonomousInstitutionapprovedbyUGCandaffiliatedtoJNTUH)
(AccreditedbyNAACwith‘A’GradeandAccreditedbyNBAofAICTE)
Yamnampet,Ghatkesar,MalkajigiriMedchalDistrict-501301.
February,2024

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
2
SREENIDHIINSTITUTEOFSCIENCEANDTECHNOLOGY
(AnAutonomousInstitution)
DEPARTMENTOF
ELECTRONICSANDCOMPUTERENGINEERING(ECM)
PROGRAMOBJECTIVES
ECMEthos–Tosolvemodernengineeringproblemswithcombinedknowledgeofhardwareandsoftware
ThecoursesstructureofECMisarrangedsuchthatstudentslearnthebasicandcontinuetoadvance
subjectsinanorderedsetofprerequisites.ThefirsttwoyearsoftheECMbringsthephysical,analytical,
computationalandcommunicationapproachesrequiredasfoundationofengineeringthroughcoursesin
Mathematics,Physics,Computerlanguages(C,C++,Java),DigitalCircuitDesign,DatabaseManagement,
EnglishandTechnicalSeminars.Manyofthesecoursesincludeweeklylabsinwhichstudentscanutilize
state-oftheartlabfacilitiestosimulateandsolveinterestingproblem.
TheIIIandIVyearsoftheECMstudyfocusesontheconceptsandtechniquesusedinthedesignand
developmentofadvancedhardwareandsoftwaresystems.Inaddition,studentswillbeprovidedwith
elaboratechoicesofelectivestreams(minorstream)toselectbasedontheirliking.Also,agenerous
allotmentofopenelectivesisincludedtopermitstudentgatherinterdisciplinaryknowledge.These
synergeticeffortsaremadetoensureourstudentsgaincomprehensiveknowledgearoundtheircoreareaof
studyandbesuccessfulincareeroftheirchoice.
Further,theprogramcurriculumisdesignedbysurveyingthelatestskillsindemandfortheareasof
ElectronicsandComputer.Aftercompletingthisprogramourgraduatesstrivetobehighachievers,
responsibleandthoughtfulengineerscontributingtosociety.

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
3
VISION
ToemergeasapremiercentreinElectronicsandComputerengineeringwithfocusonhumanvaluesandprofessional
ethics
MISSION
1.ToprepareElectronicsandComputerEngineeringgraduatestobealife-longlearnerwithcompetencein
basicsciences,engineering&professionalcore,interdisciplinarysubjects,sothattheycanhave
professionalcareerortopursuehigherstudies.
2.DevelopingliaisonwithAcademia,R&Dinstitutions,softwareandelectronicsIndustriesforexposureof
studentstothepracticalaspectsinengineeringandsolutionoftheindustryorientedandsocietalproblems,
entrepreneurialpursuitandprojectmanagement.
3.Inculcatinginterpersonalskills,teamwork,professionalethics,IPRandregulatoryissuesinstudentsto
improvetheiremployabilityandpromotingleadershipinchangingglobalenvironment
4.Tocontinuouslyengageinresearchanddevelopmentactivitiesandtopromotescientifictemperinthe
graduates.
PROGRAMMEEDUCATIONALOBJECTIVES
1.Graduateswillhavestrongfoundationinfundamentalsofbasicsciences,mathematics,Engineering
sciencesandtechnologywithabilitiestounderstandsocietalproblems
2.Graduateswillhavesuccessfulprofessionalcareerbydemonstratinggoodscientificandengineering
breadthtocomprehendtheproblemsusingmoderntools,conductexperiments,analyzetheresultsand
designnovelproductsandsolutionstothereallifeproblems.
3.Graduateswillbemotivatedtoachieveacademicexcellenceandpromoteentrepreneurshipandskillsin
projectandfinancemanagement,pursueresearchtodeveloplife–longlearninginaworldofconstantly
evolvingtechnology
4.Graduateswillbetrainedinhumanvalues,ProfessionalethicsandIntellectualPropertyrelatedissuesin
broaderenvironmentalandsocialcontextandsustainabledevelopment,communicationskills,teamwork
skills,leadershipandmultidisciplinaryapproach.
MAPPING
PEOs
MissionoftheDepartment
M1M2M3M4
132
2232
3331
423

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
4
PROGRAMMEOUTCOMES(POs)ofB.TechECM
1.Engineeringknowledge:Applytheknowledgeofmathematics,science,engineeringfundamentals,andan
engineeringspecializationtothesolutionofcomplexengineeringproblems.
2.Problemanalysis:Identify,formulate,reviewresearchliterature,andanalyzecomplexengineering
problemsreachingsubstantiatedconclusionsusingfirstprinciplesofmathematics,naturalsciences,and
engineeringsciences.
3.Design/developmentofsolutions:Designsolutionsforcomplexengineeringproblemsanddesignsystem
componentsorprocessesthatmeetthespecifiedneedswithappropriateconsiderationforthepublichealth
andsafety,andthecultural,societal,andenvironmentalconsiderations.
4.Conductinvestigationsofcomplexproblems:Useresearch-basedknowledgeandresearchmethods
includingdesignofexperiments,analysisandinterpretationofdata,andsynthesisoftheinformationto
providevalidconclusions.
5.Moderntoolusage:Create,select,andapplyappropriatetechniques,resources,andmodernengineeringand
ITtoolsincludingpredictionandmodelingtocomplexengineeringactivitieswithanunderstandingofthe
limitations.
6.Theengineerandsociety:Applyreasoninginformedbythecontextualknowledgetoassesssocietal,health,
safety,legalandculturalissuesandtheconsequentresponsibilitiesrelevanttotheprofessionalengineering
practice.
7.Environmentandsustainability:Understandtheimpactoftheprofessionalengineeringsolutionsin
societalandenvironmentalcontexts,anddemonstratetheknowledgeof,andneedforsustainable
development.
8.Ethics:Applyethicalprinciplesandcommittoprofessionalethicsandresponsibilitiesandnormsofthe
engineeringpractice.
9.Individualandteamwork:Functioneffectivelyasanindividual,andasamemberorleaderindiverseteams,
andinmultidisciplinarysettings.
10.Communication:Communicateeffectivelyoncomplexengineeringactivitieswiththeengineering
communityandwithsocietyatlarge,suchas,beingabletocomprehendandwriteeffectivereportsanddesign
documentation,makeeffectivepresentations,andgiveandreceiveclearinstructions.
11.Projectmanagementandfinance:Demonstrateknowledgeandunderstandingoftheengineeringand
managementprinciplesandapplythesetoone’sownwork,asamemberandleaderinateam,tomanage
projectsandinmultidisciplinaryenvironments.
12.Life-longlearning:Recognizetheneedfor,andhavethepreparationandabilitytoengageinIndependent
andlife-longlearninginthebroadestcontextoftechnologicalchange.

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
5
ECM(A22Regulation)CourseStructure
B.TechIYearISemester
S.
No.
Course
Categor
y
Dept.
Cours
e
Cours
eCode
NameoftheCourseLTPC
Max.Marks
Int.Ext.
1BSS&H9HC07EngineeringPhysics21034060
2ESIT9FC01ProblemSolvingusingC30034060
3BSS&H9HC11MatrixAlgebraandCalculus21034060
4HSS&H9HC01EssentialEnglishLanguageSkills20024060
5ESMECH9BC01EngineeringGraphics10434060
6HSS&H9HC61OralCommunicationLab–I00214060
7BSS&H9HC66EngineeringPhysicsLab0031.54060
8ESIT9FC61ProblemSolvingusingCLab0031.54060
9ESS&HInductionProgram------
Total1021218320480
B.TechIYearIISemester
S.
No.
Course
Category
Dept.
Course
Course
Code
NameoftheCourseLTPC
Max.
Marks
Int.Ext.
1BSS&H9HC04EngineeringChemistry21034060
2ESCSE9EC01DataStructures30034060
3BSS&H9HC12AdvancedCalculus21034060
4ESEEE9AC42
ElectricCircuitsandNetworks
Analysis
21034060
5HSS&H9HC62OralCommunicationLab–II0031.54060
6BSS&H9HC64EngineeringChemistryLab0031.54060
7ESCSE9EC61DataStructuresusingCLab0031.54060
8ESMECH9BC61
Workshop/ManufacturingProcesses
Lab
0132.54060
Total941219320480
TotalCredits:37

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
6
B.TechIIYearISemester
S.
No.
Course
Categor
y
Dept.
Cours
e
Cours
eCode
NameoftheCourseLTPC
Max.Marks
Int.Ext.
1HSS&H9HC05EnvironmentalScience3000Pass/Fail
2BSECM9D301
DiscreteStructuresandGraph
Theory
30034060
3PCECE9CC01ElectronicDevicesandCircuits30034060
4PCECE9CC02SignalsandSystems30034060
5HSS&H9HC03UniversalHumanValues30034060
6PCCSE9EC02
ObjectOrientedProgramming
throughJava
21034060
7BSS&H9HC16
QuantitativeAptitudeand
LogicalReasoning
30034060
8PCECE9CC71
ElectronicDevicesandCircuits
Lab
0031.54060
9PCCSE9EC62
ObjectOrientedProgramming
throughJavaLab
00424060
Total201721.5320480
B.TechIIYearIISemester
S.
No.
Course
Category
Dept.
Cours
e
Cours
eCode
NameoftheCourseLTPC
Max.Marks
Int.Ext.
1HSSMS9ZC01
BusinessEconomicsandFinancial
Analysis
30034060
2PCIT9FC02PythonProgramming21034060
3PCIT9FC04DatabaseManagementSystems30034060
4BSECM9D402AnalogandPulseCircuits30034060
5PCECM9DC03FoundationsofSoftwareEngineering30034060
6HSS&H9HC63SoftSkillsLab20024060
7ESECM9D467
ITWorkshopand
PythonProgrammingLab
0031.54060
8PCIT9FC63DatabaseManagementSystemsLab0031.54060
9BSECM9D461AnalogandPulseCircuitsLab0031.54060
10PSECM9D471TechnicalSeminar0101100-
Total162922.5460540
Note:SummerInternship–Iistobecarriedoutduringthesummervacationbetween4thand
5thsemesters

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
7
TotalCredits:44

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
8
B.TechIIIYearISemester
S.
No.
Course
Categor
y
Dept.
Cours
e
Course
Code
NameoftheCourseLTPC
Max.Marks
Int.Ext.
1PEProfessionalElective-I30034060
2PCCSE9EC04DesignandAnalysisofAlgorithms21034060
3PCECE9CC06Analog&DigitalCommunications21034060
4PCECE9CC09ICApplications30034060
5PCECM9D504
ComputerOrganizationandOperating
Systems
30034060
6ESECM9D505
DataCommunicationandComputer
Networks
30034060
7PCECE9CC76ICApplicationsLab0031.54060
8PCIT9FC66WebTechnologiesLab0031.54060
9PSECM9D573SummerIndustryInternship-I00214060
Total162822360540
B.TechIIIYearIISemester
S.
No.
Course
Category
Dept.
Cours
e
Course
Code
NameoftheCourseLTPC
Max.Marks
Int.Ext.
1OEOpenElective-I30034060
2PEProfessionalElective–II30034060
3PCECM9DC06MicroprocessorsandInterface30034060
4PCECE9CC08DigitalSignalProcessing21034060
5PCECM9D607AutomataandCompilerDesign30034060
6PCIoT9IC04IntellectualPropertyRights3000Pass/Fail
7PCECM9DC62MicroprocessorsandInterfaceLab00214060
8PCECE9CC75DigitalSignalProcessingLab00424060
9PCECM9D663AutomataandCompilerDesignLab00214060
10ESECM9D672ComprehensiveVivaVoce0101100-
Total172820420480
Note:SummerInternship–II(IVYearI-Semester)istobecarriedoutduringthesummer
vacationbetween6thand7thsemesters
TotalCredits:42

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
9
B.TechIVYearISemester
S.
No.
Course
Category
Dept.
Course
Course
Code
SubjectLTP/DC
Max.Marks
Int.Ext.
1OEOpenElective-II30034060
2PEProfessionalElective-III30034060
3PEProfessionalElective–IV30034060
4PCECM9D708EmbeddedandRealTimeSystems30034060
5PCECM9D709VLSIDesign30034060
6ESIT9FC07CyberSecurityandCyberLaws20024060
7PCECM9D764EmbeddedSystemsLab0031.54060
8PCECM9D765VLSILab0031.54060
9PSECM9D774SummerIndustryInternship-II00214060
Total:170821360540
B.TechIVYearIISemester
S.
No.
Course
Categor
y
Dept.
Cours
e
Course
Code
SubjectLTP/DC
Max.Marks
Int.Ext.
1PEOpenElective-III30034060
2OEProfessionalElective-V30034060
3PSECM9D875MajorProject--20104060
Total:602016120180
TotalCredits:37
Note:AllEndExaminations(TheoryandPractical)areofThreehoursduration.
T–TutorialL-TheoryP/D–Practical/Drawing
C-CreditsInt.–InternalExamExt.–ExternalExam
CoursecodeDefinitions
BS-BasicScienceCourses
ES-EngineeringScienceCourses
HS-HumanitiesandSocialSciencesincludingManagementcourses
PC-ECMProfessionalcorecourses
PE–ECMProfessionalElectivecourses
OE-OpenElectivecourses
PS-SummerIndustryInternship,Projects,ComprehensiveVivaVoce,technicalSeminars

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
10
B.TECHECMA22REGULATIONCOURSESTRUCTURE
PROFESSIONALELECTIVESTREAMS
ProfessionalElective–I
(3-1)
ProfessionalElective–
II
(3-2)
ProfessionalElective–
III
(4-1)
ProfessionalElective–
IV
(4-1)
ProfessionalElective–
V
(4-2)
9EC10
Introductionto
DataScience
9EC13
Artificial
Intelligence
andDeep
Learning
9FC15
BigData
Analytics
9LC17DevOps9FC17
Cloud
Computing
9EC11
Advanced
Computer
Architecture
9EC14
Distributed
Databases
9IC45
Introductionto
Internetof
Things
9JC05
BlockChain
Technologies
9JC04
Ethical
Hacking
9EC12
Software
Requirements
andEstimation
9FC13
Software
Project
Management
9EC18SoftComputing9FC16
Agile
Software
Development
9EC23
Advanced
Algorithms
9C518
CMOSAnalog
ICDesign
9C622
VLSI
Physical
Design
9C726
Design
Verification
usingSystem
Verilog
9C730
LowPower
VLSIDesign
9C834
Designof
Fault
Tolerant
System
9C519
Computer
Organization&
Architecture
9C623
EmbeddedC
Programming
9C727
Embedded
System
Designusing
ARM
9C731
Embedded
RealTime
Operating
Systems
9C835
Systemon
Chip
Architecture
OPENELECTIVESSTREAMS
OpenElective
Streams
III-Year
II-Semester/
(OpenElective–I)
IV-Year
I-Semester/
(OpenElective–II)
IV-Year
II-Semester/
(OpenElective–III)
Finance
9ZC05
BankingOperations
andInsurance
9ZC15
FinancialMarkets
andServices
9ZC19
ProjectandRisk
Management
Entrepreneurship
9ZC22
Basicsof
Entrepreneurship
9ZC23
Advanced
Entrepreneurship
9ZC24
Productand
Services
Innovationand
DesignThinking
9ZC08
DesignLiteracyand
DesignThinking
9ZC09
Co-Creationand
ProductDesign
9ZC10
Entrepreneurship
&Business
Design
Electrical
9AC44
Fundamentalsof
Measurementsand
Instrumentation
9AC45
Fundamentalsof
RenewableEnergy
Sources
9AC47
PowerElectronic
Devicesand
Converters
Mechanical
9BC51
IntroductionTo
Additive
Manufacturing
Processes
9BC52
Principlesof
Operations
Research
9BC53
Principlesof
Automationand
Robotics

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
11
CourseCategorywiseCreditdistribution
(ECM-A22Regulation)
S.No.Category
SuggestedBreakup
ofCredits
(Total160)
ECM(A22)
Credits
1
HumanitiesandSocialSciencesincludingManagementCourses
(HSSM)
1212.5
2BasicSciencesincludingMathematicsCourses(BSM)2525.5
3
EngineeringSciencecoursesincludingworkshop,drawing,basic
electrical/electronics,mechanicalengineeringcourseaswellas
variouscomputercoursesofferedfornon-ITbranches(ES)
2425.5
4ProfessionalCoreCourses(PCC)4859.5
5
ProfessionalElectiveCourses(fivecourses)relevanttochosen
specialization/branch(PEC)
1815
6
OpenElectives(3courses)offeredbyanyotherengineering
departments/MBAdepartment**(OE)
189
7
Projectwork,seminarandinternshipinindustryorelsewhere
(PSI)
1513
8
Mandatorycourses(EnvironmentalSciences,Inductiontraining,
Indianconstitution,EssenceofIndianTraditionalKnowledge)
(MC)
Non-CreditNon-Credit
TOTALCREDITS160160

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
12
SyllabusforB.TechIIIYearIsemester
ElectronicsandComputerEngineering
DESIGNANDANALYSISOFALGORITHMS
Code:9EC04
Prerequisites:Datastructures
CourseObjectives:
1.
Toprovideasolidfoundationinalgorithmdesignandanalysis,specifically,thestudentlearningoutcomes
include:Basicknowledgeofgraphandmatchingalgorithms.
2.
Abilitytounderstandanddesignalgorithmsusinggreedystrategy,divideandconquerapproach,dynamic
programming,backtrackingandbranchandbound.
CourseOutcomes:
Aftercompletionofthecourse,thestudentwillbeableto
1.Analyzeworst-caserunningtimesofalgorithmsusingasymptoticanalysis.
2.Synthesizedivideand-conqueralgorithms.Deriveandsolverecurrencesdescribingtheperformanceof
divide-and-conqueralgorithms.
3.Describethegreedyparadigmandexplainwhenanalgorithmicdesignsituationcallsforit.Recitealgorithms
thatemploythisparadigm.Synthesizegreedyalgorithms,andanalyzethem.
4.Comprehendtheconceptofdynamicprogrammingalgorithms,theirapplicationsandanalyzethem.
5.AnalyzetheBacktrackingandBranchandBoundalgorithmsandalsoidentifythescenariosforitsapplicability.
ComprehendtheconceptofPandNPProblemsanditsusageintheapplications.
UNITI
Introduction:Algorithm,Pseudocodeforexpressingalgorithms,PerformanceAnalysis-Spacecomplexity,
Timecomplexity,AsymptoticNotation-Bigohnotation,Omeganotation,ThetanotationandLittleoh
notation,ProbabilisticAnalysis,ConnectedandBi-connectedComponents..
Applications:Designingoptimalsolutionwithrespecttotimeforaproblem.
UNITII
Divideandconquer:Generalmethod,Applications-Binarysearch,Quicksort,Mergesort,Strassen’s
matrixmultiplication.
Applications:PNRnumberSearch,sortingtheGooglesearchresults.
UNITIII
Greedymethod:Generalmethod,Applications-Jobsequencingwithdeadlines,0/1knapsackproblem,
Minimumcostspanningtrees,Singlesourceshortestpathproblem.
Applications:Allocationoffunds/resourcesbasedonthepriorityinthecomputersystems.
UNITIV
DynamicProgramming:Generalmethod,Applications-Matrixchainmultiplication,Optimalbinary
searchtrees,0/1knapsackproblem,Allpairsshortestpathproblem,Travellingsalespersonproblem.
Applications:RoutingAlgorithmsinthecomputernetworking
UNITV
Backtracking:Generalmethod,Applications-n-queen’sproblem,sumofsubsetsproblem,graph
colouring,Hamiltoniancycles,MazegenerationProblem
Applications:UndoinMS-Word,Games
LTP/DC
2103

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
13
UNITVI
BranchandBound:Generalmethod,Applications-Travellingsalespersonproblem,0/1knapsack
problem-LCBranchandBoundsolution,FIFOBranchandBoundsolution.
IntroductiontoNP-HardandNP-Completeproblems:Basicconceptsofnon-deterministicalgorithms,
DefinitionsofNP-HardandNP-Completeclasses.ModularArithmetic
Applications:Performanceevaluationinthedynamicsystems.
TEXTBOOKS:
1.FundamentalsofComputerAlgorithms,EllisHorowitz,SatrajSahniandRajasekharam,Galgotia
publicationspvt.Ltd.
2.AlgorithmDesign:Foundations,AnalysisandInternetexamples,M.T.GoodrichandR.Tomassia,
Johnwileyandsons.

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
14
SyllabusforB.TechIIIYearIsemester
ElectronicsandComputerEngineering
ANALOGANDDIGITALCOMMUNICATIONS
Code:9CC06
Prerequisite:ProbabilitytheoryandStochasticProcesses
CourseObjectives:
Todevelopabilitytoanalyzesystemrequirementsofanaloganddigitalcommunicationsystems.
Tounderstandthegeneration,detectionofvariousanaloganddigitalmodulationtechniques.
ToacquiretheoreticalknowledgeofeachblockinAM,FMtransmittersandreceivers.
Tounderstandtheconceptsofbasebandtransmissions,sourcecodingandchannelcoding..
CourseOutcomes:Uponcompletingthiscourse,thestudentwillbeableto
Analyzeanddesignofvariouscontinuouswaveandanglemodulationanddemodulationtechniques
Understandtheeffectofnoisepresentincontinuouswaveandanglemodulationtechniques.
AttaintheknowledgeaboutAM,FMTransmittersandReceivers
AnalyzeanddesignthevariousPulseModulationTechniques.
UnderstandtheconceptsofDigitalModulationTechniquesandBasebandtransmission,sourcecodingand
channelcoding.
COAnalog&DigitalCommunications(8CC06)
P
O
1
P
O
2
P
O
3
P
O
4
P
O
5
P
O
6
P
O
7
P
O
8
P
O
9
P
O
1
0
P
O
1
1
P
O
1
2
P
S
O
1
P
S
O
2
P
S
O
3
CO1
Analyzeanddesignofvariouscontinuouswaveand
anglemodulationanddemodulationtechniques
22222222
CO2
Understandtheeffectofnoisepresentincontinuous
waveandanglemodulationtechniques.
2222222
CO3
AttaintheknowledgeaboutAM,FMTransmittersand
Receivers
2222222
CO4
AnalyzeanddesignthevariousPulseModulation
Techniques
2222222
CO5
UnderstandtheconceptsofDigitalModulation
TechniquesandBasebandtransmission,sourcecoding
andchannelcoding
2222222
Overall2222222
UNIT–I[Lecturehrs–9]
AmplitudeModulation
Needformodulation,AmplitudeModulation-Timeandfrequencydomaindescription,singletone
modulation,powerrelationsinAMwaves,GenerationofAMwaves-Switchingmodulator,Detectionof
AMWaves-Envelopedetector,DSBSCmodulation-timeandfrequencydomaindescription,Generation
ofDSBSCWaves-BalancedModulators,CoherentdetectionofDSB-SCModulatedwaves,COSTAS
Loop,SSBmodulation-timeandfrequencydomaindescription,frequencydiscriminationandPhase
discriminationmethodsforgeneratingSSB,DemodulationofSSBWaves,principleofVestigialsideband
modulation.
Applications:AMtransmittersystem
UNIT–II[Lecturehrs–9]
AngleModulation
BasicconceptsofPhaseModulation,FrequencyModulation:Singletonefrequencymodulation,Spectrum
AnalysisofSinusoidalFMWaveusingBesselfunctions,NarrowbandFM,WidebandFM,Constant
AveragePower,TransmissionbandwidthofFMWave-GenerationofFMSignal-ArmstrongMethod,
DetectionofFMSignal:Balancedslopedetector,Phaselockedloop,ComparisonofFMandAM.,Concept
ofPre-emphasisandde-emphasis.
LTP/DC
2103

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
15
Applications:Designofa88-108MHzFMsystemusingFDM
UNIT-III
Transmitters
ClassificationofTransmitters,AMTransmitters,FMTransmitters
Receivers
RadioReceiver-ReceiverTypes-Tunedradiofrequencyreceiver,Superhetrodynereceiver,RFsection
andCharacteristics-Frequencychangingandtracking,Intermediatefrequency,Imagefrequency,AGC,
Amplitudelimiting,FMReceiver,ComparisonofAMandFMReceivers.
Applications:DesignofanAMtransmittersystem.
UNIT-IV
PulseModulation
TypesofPulsemodulation-PAM,PWMandPPM.ComparisonofFDMandTDM.
PulseCodeModulation
PCMGenerationandReconstruction,QuantizationNoise,Non-UniformQuantizationandCompanding,
DPCM,AdaptiveDPCM,DMandAdaptiveDM,NoiseinPCMandDM.
Applications:DesignofE1andT1digital-carriersystems
UNIT-V
DigitalModulationTechniques
ASK-Modulator,CoherentASKDetector,FSK-Modulator,Non-CoherentFSKDetector,BPSK-
Modulator,CoherentBPSKDetection.PrinciplesofQPSK,DifferentialPSKandQAM.
BasebandTransmissionandOptimalReceptionofDigitalSignal
ABasebandSignalReceiver,ProbabilityofError,OptimumReceiver,CoherentReception,ISI,Eye
Diagrams.
Applications:DesignofMODEMforvoicetransmission
Unit-VI:
SOURCECODING
Introduction,advantages,Shannon’stheoremforChannelcapacity,Huffmancode,Shannon-Fanocoding,
bandwidth–S/Ntradeoff.
CHANNELCODING
Introduction-typesoferrors,redundancy,detectionvscorrection,forwarderrorcorrectionversus
retransmission;linearblockcodes,errordetectionandcorrectioncapabilitiesoflinearblockcodes,
Hammingcode,cycliccodes:encoding,syndromecalculation,decoding,CRCcodes–hardwarerealization;
convolutionalcodes:encodingusingstate,treeandtrellisdiagrams,decodingusingViterbialgorithm
APLLICATIONS:Designofchannelcodingfor3G
TEXTBOOKS:
1.AnalogandDigitalCommunications–SimonHaykin,JohnWiley,2005.
2.ElectronicsCommunicationSystems-FundamentalsthroughAdvanced-WayneTomasi,5
th
Edition,
2009,PHI.
REFERENCEBOOKS:
1.PrinciplesofCommunicationSystems-HerbertTaub,DonaldLSchilling,GoutamSaha,3
rd
Edition,McGraw-Hill,2008.
2.ElectronicCommunications–DennisRoddyandJohnCoolean,4
th
Edition,PEA,2004
3.Electronics&CommunicationSystem–GeorgeKennedyandBernardDavis,TMH2004Analog
andDigitalCommunication–K.SamShanmugam,Willey,20

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
16
SyllabusforB.TechIIIYearIsemester
ElectronicsandComputerEngineering
ICAPPLICATIONS
Code:9CC09
CourseObjectives
Tomaintaintherightblendoftheoryandpracticeinanalyzinganddesigningawidevarietyofapplications
usingIC741op-amps
ToacquaintthelearnerswithawidevarietyofIClogicfamilies,andtheirapplications.
CourseOutcomes
Afterstudyingthiscourse,thestudentswillbeableto
[CO1]DemonstratetheconceptsofDifferentialAmplifierandOperationalAmplifierandtheircharacteristics.
[CO2]DesignthebasiccircuitsusingIC741op-amp.
[CO3]Explore,designandanalyzeactivefilters,timers,oscillators,voltagecontrolledoscillatorDACsand
ADCs,andICregulators.
[CO4]ClassifyandcharacterizetheTTL/ECL/CMOSLogicFamiliesanddesignofvariouslogicgatesusing
them.
UNIT–I[Lecturehrs–9]
OPAMP&ITSCHARACTERISTICS[T1][CO1]
DifferentialAmplifiersanditsCharacteristics.Op-AmpBlockDiagram,IdealOP-AMPCharacteristics,DC
andACCharacteristics.741Op-AmpanditsFeaturesandCharacteristics.ParametersMeasurement:Offset
VoltageandCurrent,SlewRateandCMRR.FrequencyCompensation.
UNIT–II[Lecturehrs–9]
BASICAPPLICATIONSOFOP-AMPs[T1][CO2]
Adder/Subtractor,DifferenceAmplifier,InstrumentationAmplifier,Differentiator,Integrator,V/I&I/V
Converters,Comparators,Multivibrators,SquareandTriangularWaveformGenerators,Clippers,
Clampers,PeakDetector,S/Hcircuit.
UNIT–III[Lecturehrs–9]
FILTERs,TIMERs&PLLs[T1][CO3]
Filters:Introduction,ButterworthFilters-FirstandSecondOrderActiveFilters-LPF,HPF,BPF,BRF.
Introductionto555Timer,FunctionalBlock,555timersasMonostableandAstableMultivibratorsand
Applications,SchmittTrigger.VoltageControlledOscillator(IC566),PhaseLockedLoop.
Applications:Designofvisitorscounterusing555timer.
UNIT–IV[Lecturehrs–9]
OSCILLATORS,D/AANDA/DCONVERTERS,ICREGULATORS[T1][CO3]
Oscillators:Introduction,DesignandAnalysisofWeinBridge,RCPhaseshiftOscillatorsusingop-amp.
D/AConverters:Introduction,CharacteristicParameters,R-2RLadder,WeightedResistor,InverterR-2R
typeD/AConverter,A/DConverters:Introduction,CharacteristicParameters,CounterType,DualSlope,
SuccessiveApproximationandFlashtypesA/DConverters,ICREGULATORS:Threeterminalvoltage
regulators7805,7809,7912,IC723.
UNIT–V[Lecturehrs–9]
LTP/DC
3003

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
17
LOGICFAMILIES[T2][CO4]
ClassificationofICLogicFamilies,Multiemittertransistorlogic.StandardTTLNAND&NOR
Gate-Analysis&TTLOpenCollectorOutputs,TristateTTL.Unsaturatedlogic-ECLlogicfamily,ECL
Inverter/Buffer,ECLNOR/ORlogic.Electricalcharacteristicsoflogicgates.
UNIT–VI[Lecturehrs–9]
MOS&CMOSLOGICFAMILY[T2][CO4]
NMOS&PMOSlogic-Logicgatesimplementation,Passivepullup&activepullup.CMOSlogicfamily-
DesignoflogicgatesandBooleanfunctions.CMOSOpenDrainandTristateOutputs.Comparisonof
VariousLogicFamilies.ICinterfacing,TTLdrivingCMOS&CMOSdrivingTTL.
Applications:Designof4x1MUXusingCMOS
TextBooks
[T1]
D.RoyChowdhary,LinearIntegratedCircuits,NewAgePublications(P)Ltd,2ndEdition,2003.
[T2]
JohnF.Wakerly,DigitalDesignPrinciples&Practices,PHI/PearsonEducationAsia,3rdEd.,
2005.
References
[R1]
RamakanthA.Gayakwad,Op-Amps&LinearICs,PHI,1987.
[R2]
SergioFranco,DesignwithOperationalAmplifiers&AnalogIntegratedCircuits,McGrawHill,
1988.
[R3]
R.F.Coughlin&FredrickDriscoll,OperationalAmplifiers&LinearIntegratedCircuits,PHI,6th
Edition.
[R4]
K.LalKishore,LinearIntegratedCircuitApplication,PearsonEducations,2005.

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
18
SyllabusforB.TechIIIYearIsemester
ElectronicsandComputerEngineering
COMPUTERORGANIZATIONANDOPERATINGSYSTEMS
Code:9D504
CourseObjectives:Thecourseobjectivesare
·Tohaveathoroughunderstandingofthebasicstructureandoperationofadigitalcomputer.
·Todiscussindetailtheoperationofthearithmeticunitincludingthealgorithms&implementationof
fixed-pointandfloating-pointaddition,subtraction,multiplication&division.
·TostudythedifferentwaysofcommunicatingwithI/OdevicesandstandardI/Ointerfaces.
·Tostudythehierarchicalmemorysystemincludingcachememoriesandvirtualmemory.
·Todemonstratetheknowledgeoffunctionsofoperatingsystemmemorymanagementscheduling,filesystem
andinterface,distributedsystems,securityanddeadlocks.
·ToimplementasignificantportionofanOperatingSystem.
CourseOutcomes:Uponcompletionofthecourse,studentswillhavethoroughknowledgeabout:
·Basicstructureofadigitalcomputer
·Arithmeticoperationsofbinarynumbersystem
·TheorganizationoftheControlunit,ArithmeticandLogicalunit,MemoryunitandtheI/Ounit.
·Operatingsystemfunctions,types,systemcalls.
·Memorymanagementtechniquesanddeadlockavoidance
Operatingsystemsfilesystemimplementationanditsinterface.
UNIT-I
BasicStructureofComputers:ComputerTypes,BasicOPERATIONALConcepts,BusStructures,
Software,Performance,MultiprocessorsandMultiComputers,DataRepresentation,FixedPoint
Representation,Floating–PointRepresentation.
RegisterTransferLanguageandMicroOperations:RegisterTransferLanguage,BusandMemory
Transfers,ArithmeticandLogicMicroOperations,RoleofInterruptServiceRoutines,Instruction
Formats,AddressingModes
UNIT-II
OperatingSystemsOverview:OverviewofComputerOperatingSystemsFunctions,Protectionand
Security,DistributedSystems,SpecialPurposeSystems,OperatingSystemsStructures-Operating
SystemServicesandSystemsCalls,SystemPrograms,OperatingSystemsGeneration.
UNIT-III
ConceptsandtypesofSemiconductorMemories-RAM,ReadOnlyMemories,CacheMemory–Cache
mappingalgorithms–Performanceconsiderations–VirtualMemory–NeedandAlgorithmsSwapping,
ContiguousMemoryAllocation,Paging,StructureofPageTable,Segmentation,VirtualMemory,Demand
Paging,PageReplacementAlgorithms,AllocationofFrames,Thrashing
UNIT-IV
HardwareControl:ControlMemory,AddressSequencing,MicroprogramExamples,DesignofControl
Unit,HardWiredControl,MicroprogrammedControl,Samplecircuitdesignusinghardwiredand
microprogrammedcontrol
UNIT-V
Input-OutputOrganization:PeripheralDevices,Input-OutputInterface,AsynchronousDataTransfer
Modes,PriorityInterrupt,DirectMemoryAccess,Input–OutputProcessor(IOP),Serial
Communication;IntroductiontoPeripheralComponents,Interconnect(PCI)Bus
LTP/DC
3003

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
19
UNIT-VI
FileSystemInterface
PrinciplesofDeadlock:SystemModel,DeadlockCharacterization,DeadlockPrevention,Detectionand
Avoidance,RecoveryfromDeadlock.
ConceptofaFile,AccessMethods,DirectoryStructure,FileSystemMounting,FileSharing,Protection,
AllocationMethods,Free-SpaceManagement.
TEXTBOOKS:
1.ComputerOrganization–CarlHamacher,ZvonksVranesic,SafeaZaky,5thEdition,McGrawHill.
2.ComputerSystemsArchitecture–M.MorisMano,3rdEdition,Pearson
3.OperatingSystemConcepts-AbrahamSilberchatz,PeterB.Galvin,GregGagne,8
th
Edition,John
Wiley.
REFERENCEBOOKS:
1.ComputerOrganizationandArchitecture–WilliamStallings6
th
Edition,Pearson
2.StructuredComputerOrganization–AndrewS.Tanenbaum,4
th
EditionPHI
3.FundamentalsofComputerOrganizationandDesign–SivaraamaDandamudiSpringerInt.Edition.

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
20
SyllabusforB.TechIIIYearIsemester
ElectronicsandComputerEngineering
DATACOMMUNICATIONANDCOMPUTERNETWORKS
Code:9D505
CourseObjective:Inthiscoursethestudentwilllearnabout
(i)DataCommunications&NetworksinNetworkmodels
(ii)TheOSImodel&functionalitiesofeachlayerindetail.
CourseOutcomes:Aftercompletingthiscourse,studentshouldbeableto
(i)Identify&summarizethefunctionalitiesofeachlayerintheOSImodel.
(ii)ImplementErrordetection&Errorcorrectiontechniques.
(iii)DevelopNetworklayerroutingalgorithms.
(iv)Designamechanismwhichcandetect,preventorrecoverfromasecurityattack.
(v)ImplementationofHierarchicalroutingandsubnets-routingalgorithm.
(vi)Protocolsoftransportlayerandapplicationlayer.
UNIT–I:IntroductiontoDataCommunications:Networks,theInternet,Protocolsandstandards,Network
models:layeredtasks,theOSImodel,LayersintheOSImodel,TCP/IPProtocolsuite,OSIVs.TCP,
Addressing.
UNIT–II:Physicallayerandmedia:Dataandsignals:Analoganddigital,periodicanalogsignals,
digitalsignals,Transmissionimpairment,Dataratelimits,Performance.
BandwidthutilizationandmultipleaccessTechniques:MultiplexingandSpreadin:Multiplexing,
De-multiplexingSpreadspectrum,TDMA,FDMA,CDMA.
UNIT–III:Transmissionmedia:Guidedmedia,andunguidedmediaSwitching:Circuit-switched
networks,Datagramnetworks,Virtual-circuitnetworks,Structureofaswitch.
UNIT–IV:Datalinklayer:errordetectionandcorrection;Introduction,Blockcoding,Linearblockcodes,
Cycliccodes,ChecksumDatalinkcontrol:Framing,Flowanderrorcontrol,Protocols,Noiselesschannels,
Noisychannels,HDLC,Point–to–pointprotocol
UNIT–V:NetworkLayer:RoutingAlgorithms:Non-adaptiveandAdaptive;StaticRouting-Shortest
pathrouting,Flooding,DynamicRouting–Distancevectorrouting,Link-staterouting,Hierarchical
routing,Broadcastrouting,Multicastrouting,Routingformobilehosts.Congestion-CongestionControl
Algorithms,GeneralPrinciples,Congestionpreventionpolicies.
UNIT–VI:TransportLayer:TransportServices,Connectionmanagement,TCPandUDPprotocols;
ATMAALLayerProtocol.ApplicationLayer–Domainnamesystem,SNMP,ElectronicMail,Multi
Media.
NetworkSecurity–SecurityConcepts,SecurityAttacks,SecurityServices,SecurityMechanisms,A
ModelforNetworkSecurity,FeistalCipherStructure.
TEXTBOOKS:
1.ComputerNetworks-AndrewSTanenbaum,4thEdition.PearsonEducation/PHI
2.DataCommunicationsandNetworking–BehrouzA.Forouzan.ThirdEditionTMH.
REFERENCES:
1.AnEngineeringApproachtoComputerNetworks-S.Keshav,2ndEdition,PearsonEducation
2.UnderstandingcommunicationsandNetworks,3rdEdition,W.A.Shay,Thomson
3.CryptographyandNetworkSecurity,WilliamStallings,Fourthedition.
LTP/DC
3003

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
21
SyllabusforB.TechIIIYearIsemester
ElectronicsandComputerEngineering
ICAPPLICATIONSLAB
Code:9CC76
Prerequisites:EDC,DLD,DLDLab,ECNA.
CourseObjectives:
Theobjectivesofthiscourseare
ToDesignandanalyzethevariouscircuitsandsystemsusingIC741Op-Amp.
ToDesignandanalyzethevariouscircuitsandsystemsusingAnalogICs.
CourseOutcomes:Afterstudyingthiscourse,thestudentswillbeableto
CO1.ExploretheoperatingmodesofIC741OP-AMPanddesignapplicationsusing741Op-Amp.
CO2.Implementapplicationsusing555Timers
CO3.DesignDtoAconvertersandICvoltageregulators
SyllabusContent
(ICApplicationLab)
Designandtestingof
1.OPAMPModes(-vefeedback)–Inverting,Noninverting,Differentialamp,Unitygain.
2.OPAMPApplications–Adders,Subtractor.
3.OPAMPApplications–ComparatorCircuits.
4.OPAMPApplications–ClipperCircuits.
5.SquarewavegeneratorusingOPAMP
6.TriangularwavegeneratorusingOPAMP
7.ActiveFilterApplications–LPF,HPF(firstorder)
8.Oscillators-RCphaseshift,Weinbridge.
9.IC555Timer–Monostable
10.IC555Timer-Astable
11.4bitDACusingOPAMP.
12.IC723voltageregulator
LTP/DC
0031.5

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
22
SyllabusforB.TechIIIYearIsemester
ElectronicsandComputerEngineering
WEBTECHNOLOGIESLAB
Code:9FC66
Objectives:
1.ApplyHTML5andCSS3skillstocreatefunctionalandvisuallyappealingwebpages.
2.DevelopinteractivewebapplicationsusingJavaScriptandDOMmanipulation.
3.Buildanddeployfull-stackwebapplicationsusingtheMERNstack.
4.DesignandimplementRESTfulAPIsusingNode.jsandExpress.js.
5.Createinteractiveanduser-friendlywebinterfaceswithReactJS.
CourseOutcomes:
Uponsuccessfulcompletionofthiscourse,:
CO1:WebDevelopmentFoundations:StudentswillmasterHTML5,applyingsemanticelements,utilizingtheWeb
StorageAPI,anddemonstratingproficiencyinCSS3,encompassingsyntax,types,boxmodel,Grid,Flexbox,
ResponsiveWebDesign,andpracticalapplicationoftheTailwindCSSframework.
CO2:JavaScriptMasteryandAdvancedConcepts:ParticipantswillachieveproficiencyinJavaScript,
understandingdatatypes,functions,arrays,objects,andmasteringadvancedconceptslikelet,const,arrow
functions,andPromisesthroughpracticalcodingscenarios.
CO3:Server-SideDevelopmentEssentials:studentswillacquirefoundationalknowledgeinwebservers,REST
APIprinciples,andExpressframeworkusageforrenderingviews,handlingsessions,forms,fileuploads,and
connectingtoanSQLdatabase.
CO4:DatabaseIntegrationandMERNStackIntroduction:Inthelaboratorysetting,studentswillgainhands-on
experienceconnectingtoMongoDBwithNode,readingandwritingdata,whilealsoreceivingan
introductiontotheMERNstack,coveringMERNcomponents,serverlessarchitecture,Node.jsfundamentals,
andbasicserversetup.
Note:Studentscanselectany3ProblemStatementsfromeachCycle
Cycle1:
ProblemStatement1:ResponsivePersonalPortfolioWebsite(2hours)
CreatearesponsivepersonalportfoliowebsiteusingHTML5andCSS3.Thewebsiteshouldinclude
sectionsforyourprofile,skills,experience,projects,andcontactinformation.UseTailwindCSStostylethe
websiteandensureitisresponsiveacrossdifferentscreensizes.
ProblemStatement2:E-commerceProductPage(3hours)
Designanddevelopane-commerceproductpageusingHTML5,CSS3,andTailwindCSS.Thepageshould
displayproductinformation,includingimages,descriptions,prices,andoptionsforaddingtocart.Use
TailwindCSStocreateavisuallyappealingandconsistentlayout.
ProblemStatement3:InteractiveBlogPostwithComments(3hours)
CreateaninteractiveblogpostwithcommentsusingHTML5,CSS3,andJavaScript.Theblogpostshould
includeatitle,author,content,andacommentsection.UseJavaScripttoenableuserstosubmitcomments
anddisplaythemonthepage.
ProblemStatement4:AdaptiveLandingPageforDifferentDevices(2hours)
Developanadaptivelandingpagethatadjustsitslayoutandcontentbasedontheuser'sdevice.UseHTML5,
CSS3,andJavaScripttodetectthedevicetypeanddisplaytheappropriatecontent.Employmediaqueries
andresponsivedesigntechniquestoensurethepagelooksgreatonalldevices.
Cycle2:
ProblemStatement1:DynamicallyGeneratedContentwithJavaScript(2hours)
CreateawebpagethatdynamicallygeneratescontentusingJavaScript.Thepageshouldincludeabutton
that,whenclicked,generatesanewrandomnumberanddisplaysitonthepage.UseJavaScriptto
manipulatetheDocumentObjectModel(DOM)toaddandremoveelements.
ProblemStatement2:InteractiveShoppingCartwithJavaScript(3hours)
LTP/DC
0031.5

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
23
DevelopaninteractiveshoppingcartusingJavaScript.Thecartshouldallowuserstoaddandremoveitems,
updatequantities,andcalculatethetotalprice.UtilizeJavaScriptarraysandobjectstostoreproduct
informationandmanagecartoperations.
ProblemStatement3:RegularExpression-BasedTextManipulation(3hours)
Buildawebapplicationthatperformstextmanipulationusingregularexpressions.Theapplicationshould
allowuserstoenteratextstringandprovideoptionsforsearch,replace,andformatting.Implementregular
expressionpatternstoidentifyandmodifyspecifictextelements.
ProblemStatement4:AsynchronousDataFetchingandDisplaywithJavaScriptPromisesand
Async/await(2hours)
CreateawebpagethatfetchesdatafromanAPIasynchronouslyusingJavaScriptpromisesand
Async/await.Thepageshoulddisplayaloadingindicatorwhilethedataisbeingfetchedandthenrenderthe
datainalistortable.Demonstratetheuseofpromisestohandleasynchronousoperationsandimprovecode
readability.
Cycle3:
ProblemStatement1:BuildingaSimpleRESTAPIwithMERNStack(2hours)
CreateasimpleRESTAPIusingtheMERNstack(MongoDB,Express.js,React.js,andNode.js).TheAPI
shouldallowuserstoperformbasicCRUD(Create,Read,Update,Delete)operationsonadatacollection,
suchasalistoftasksorproducts.DesigntheAPIendpoints,implementtheserver-sidelogicusingNode.js
andExpress.js,andconnecttheAPItoaMongoDBdatabase.
ProblemStatement2:DevelopingaServer-SideApplicationwithNode.jsandExpress.js(3hours)
Buildaserver-sideapplicationusingNode.jsandExpress.js.Theapplicationshouldprovideanendpointto
acceptuserinput,performsomeprocessing,andreturnaresponse.Implementerrorhandlingandlogging
mechanismstoensuretheapplicationrunsreliably.ExploreusingNode.jsmodulesforcommontasks,such
asfileI/Oanddatavalidation.
ProblemStatement3:WorkingwithEnvironmentVariablesandDotenvinNode.jsApplications(2
hours)
CreateaNode.jsapplicationthatutilizesenvironmentvariablesanddotenvtomanagesensitive
configurationdata.Implementdotenvtoloadenvironmentvariablesfroma.envfileandusethem
throughouttheapplication.Demonstratehowtoaccessandupdateenvironmentvariablessecurely.
ProblemStatement4:ImplementingEvent-DrivenProgrammingwithNode.js(3hours)
Developanevent-drivenNode.jsapplicationthatutilizestheNode.jsEventEmitterAPI.Createcustom
eventstorepresentdifferentoccurrences,suchasuseractionsorsensorreadings.Registereventlistenersto
handletheseeventsandperformappropriateactions.Exploreusingmoduleslikeasync/awaittomanage
asynchronouseventhandling.
Cycle4:
ProblemStatement1:BuildingaSimpleWebServerwithHTTPRequestHandling(2hours)
CreateabasicHTTPserverusingNode.jsandExpress.js.TheservershouldhandleGETandPOST
requests,respondwithappropriateHTTPstatuscodes,andparserequestpayloads.Implementroute
handlingtodirectrequeststospecificfunctionsforprocessing.
ProblemStatement2:DesigningandImplementingaRESTAPIforResourceManagement(2hours)
DesignaRESTAPIformanagingacollectionofresources,suchasbooksorproducts.DefinetheAPI
endpointsforeachresourceoperation(Create,Read,Update,Delete)andmapthemtoHTTPverbs(POST,
GET,PUT,DELETE).ImplementtheAPIusingNode.jsandExpress.js,includingerrorhandlingand
validationchecks.
Cycle5:
ProblemStatement1:DevelopingaFull-StackWebApplicationwithExpressandMongoDB(2
hours)
Createafull-stackwebapplicationusingExpress.jsandMongoDB.Theapplicationshouldallowusersto
create,read,update,anddelete(CRUD)datastoredinaMongoDBdatabase.ImplementtheExpress
frameworktohandlerouting,requestprocessing,andtemplating.UtilizeMongoDBtostoreandretrieve
datausingtheNode.jsMongoDBdriver.

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
24
ProblemStatement2:BuildingaRESTAPIwithExpressandMongoDBforUserManagement(3
hours)
DesignandimplementaRESTAPIusingExpress.jsandMongoDBforusermanagement.TheAPIshould
allowuserstoregister,login,updatetheirprofiles,andmanagetheirdata.Implementauthenticationand
authorizationmechanismstosecureuseraccess.UtilizeMongoDBtostoreuserinformationandsession
data.
ProblemStatement3:CreatingaFileUploadApplicationwithExpressandMongoDB(2hours)
DevelopafileuploadapplicationusingExpress.jsandMongoDB.Theapplicationshouldallowusersto
uploadfiles,storetheminMongoDB,andretrievethemlater.Implementfilehandlingtechniquestoensure
secureandefficientfileuploadsandstorage.UtilizeMongoDBtostorefilemetadataandreferences.
ProblemStatement4:ImplementingImageProcessingandDisplaywithExpressandMongoDB(3
hours)
BuildanimageprocessinganddisplayapplicationusingExpress.jsandMongoDB.Theapplicationshould
allowuserstouploadimages,applyimageprocessingfilters,anddisplaytheprocessedimages.Utilize
imageprocessinglibrariestomanipulateimagesandstoreprocessedimagesinMongoDB.Implement
imagerenderingtechniquestodisplayimagesonthewebpage.
Cycle6:
ProblemStatement1:BuildingaDynamicReactJSApplicationwithStateManagement(2hours)
CreateadynamicReactJSapplicationthatmanagesstateusinghooks.Theapplicationshoulddisplayalist
ofitemsandallowuserstoadd,remove,andupdateitems.Implementstatemanagementtechniquestokeep
theUIinsyncwithdatachanges.UtilizehookslikeuseStateanduseEffecttohandlestateupdatesandside
effects.
ProblemStatement2:DevelopingaData-DrivenReactJSApplicationwithAPIFetching(3hours)
Buildadata-drivenReactJSapplicationthatfetchesdatafromanAPIandrendersitontheUI.The
applicationshoulddisplayalistofdataitemsretrievedfromtheAPIandallowuserstofilterandsearchfor
items.ImplementdatafetchingtechniquesusingthefetchAPIorlibrarieslikeAxios.Utilizestate
managementtostoreandupdatedatafromtheAPI.
ProblemStatement3:CreatingaUserInterfacewithReactRouterforNavigation(2hours)
DevelopauserinterfacewithReactRouterfornavigationbetweendifferentcomponentsandroutes.The
applicationshouldhavemultiplepages,suchasahomepage,acontactpage,andanaboutpage.Implement
ReactRoutercomponentstohandleroutingandprovidesmoothtransitionsbetweenpages.Utilizenested
routestoorganizecomplexnavigationstructures.
ProblemStatement4:BuildingandDeployingaReactJSApplicationtoaHostingPlatform(3hours)
BuildacompleteReactJSapplicationanddeployittoahostingplatformlikeNetlifyorVercel.The
applicationshouldhaveafunctionalUI,interactwithAPIs,andhandleuserinput.Implementbuildtools
likeWebpackorParceltobundleandoptimizetheapplication.Configurethedeploymentenvironmentand
deploytheapplicationtothechosenhostingplatform.
REFERENCES:
1.E–resource:https://nodejs.org/en/docs/
2.E–resource:https://reactjs.org/
3.E–resource:https://tailwindcss.com/
4.E–resource:https://expressjs.com/
5.E–resource:https://web.dev/learn/css
6.E–resource:https://web.dev/learn/html

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
25
SyllabusforB.TechIIIYearIsemester
ElectronicsandComputerEngineering
SUMMERINDUSTRYINTERNSHIP-I
Code:9D573
CourseObjective:
Thestudentsundergoindustrialtrainingsothathe/shebecomeindustry-ready.
CourseOutcomes:
Attheendofthetraining,thestudentisableto
1.Selectthereal-timeproblemintheindustry.
2.Analyzetherequirementswithrespecttotheproblemstatement
3.Designtheoptimalsolutionfortheproblem.
4.Implementthesolutionusingtheappropriatemoderntools.
5.Presentandsubmitthereport
Studentshallcarryouttheprojectinindustryduringsummervacationfor3-6weeks.Thereisinternaland
externalEvaluation.InternalEvaluationcarries40marksandexternalEvaluationcarries60marks,Total
100marks.
PatternofCIEforSummerIndustryInternships–40marks
S.NoDescriptionMarks
1Presentation15
2InternalEvaluation15
3Report10
Total40
PatternofSEEforSummerIndustryInternships–60Marks
S.NoDescriptionMarks
1Presentation10
2Demonstration/Technology40
3Report10
Total60
LTP/DC
0021

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
26
SyllabusforB.TechIIIYearIsemester
ElectronicsandComputerEngineering
INTRODUCTIONTODATASCIENCE
(ProfessionalElective–I)
Code:9EC10
Prerequisite:PythonProgramming,ProbabilityandStatistics
CourseObjective:
Learnconcepts,algorithms,techniquesandtoolstoanalyzethedata,datamodellingandvisualizationof
data.
CourseOutcomes:
Aftercompletionofthecourse,thestudentshouldbeableto:
1.ExplaindifferentlevelsofData,variousDatasetsanddemonstratemathematicalmodelsfor
representation.[L2,L3]-U1,U2
2.Summarizeandapplythestatisticaltechniquestotestthesamplingdistributionsandtheirgoodness.
[L2,L3]-U2,U3
3.ApplyArrayhandling,DataManipulationtechniquesonvariousdatasetsandanalyzeusing
Visualizationtechniques.[L3,L4]-U4,U5
4.ClassifyandexplaindifferentMachineLearningTechniques.[L2]-U6
UNIT1
Datascience:Basicterminology-Example–SigmaTechnologies
TypesofData:Structuredversusunstructureddata-Quantitativeversusqualitativedata-Thefourlevelsof
data–Nominal–Ordinal–Interval–Ratio
UNIT2
BasicMathematics-Basicsymbolsandterminology-Vectorsandmatrices–Arithmeticsymbols-
Summation-Proportional-Dotproduct-Graphs-Logarithms/exponents–Settheory-Linearalgebra-
Matrixmultiplication
BasicStatistics:Obtainingdata-Observational-Experimental-Samplingdata–Probabilitysampling-
Randomsampling-Unequalprobabilitysampling-Measuringstatistics-Measuresofcenter-Measuresof
variation-Measuresofrelativestanding-TheEmpiricalrule
UNIT3
AdvancedStatistics:Pointestimates-Samplingdistributions-Confidenceintervals-Hypothesistests-
Conductingahypothesistest-Onesamplet-tests-Exampleofaonesamplet-tests-Assumptionsofthe
onesamplet-tests-TypeIandtypeIIerrors–Hypothesistestforcategoricalvariables-Chi-square
goodnessoffittest-Chi-squaretestforassociation/independence
UNIT4
TheBasicsofNumPyArrays-TheBasicsofNumPyArrays-Aggregations:Min,Max,andEverythingin
Between-ComputationonArrays:Broadcasting-FancyIndexingDataManipulationwithPandas-
IntroducingPandasObjects-DataIndexingandSelection-HandlingMissingData-CombiningDatasets:
ConcatandAppend–AggregationandGrouping.VisualizationwithMatplotlib-Importingmatplotlib-
SimpleLinePlots-SimpleScatterPlots-Histograms,Binnings,andDensity–casestudy:Effectof
HolidaysonUSBirths
LTP/DC
3003

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
27
UNIT5
Thebiasvariancetradeoff,Errorduetobias,Errorduetovariance,Twoextremecasesofbias/variance
tradeoff,Underfitting,Overfitting,Howbias/varianceplayintoerrorfunctions,Kfoldscross-validation,
Gridsearching,Visualizingtrainingerrorversuscross-validationerror
UNIT-6
BasicMachineLearning:Introductiontomachinelearning,typesofmachinelearning:
Supervisedandunsupervised
TypesofSupervisedlearning:Classificationandregression,Classifiers–Decisiontreeand
k-NearestNeighbors(k-NN),
Typesofunsupervised:Clusteringk-means,AssociationRulemining
TEXTBOOKS:
1.PrinciplesofDataScience,SinanOzdemir,Packt,(2016)
2.PythonDataSciencehandbook,EssentialToolsforWorkingwithData,JakeVanderplas,O’Reilly,
(2017)
REFERENCES:
1.Pang-NingTan,MichaelSteinbach,VipinKumar,IntroductiontoDataMining,Pearson
2.LauraIgualandSantiSeguí,IntroductiontoDataScience,Springer

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
28
SyllabusforB.TechIIIYearIsemester
ElectronicsandComputerEngineering
ADVANCEDCOMPUTERARCHITECTURE
(ProfessionalElective–I)
Code:9EC11
Prerequisites:ComputerOrganization
CourseObjectives
1.Toimparttheconceptsandprinciplesofparallelandadvancedcomputerarchitectures.
2.TodevelopthedesigntechniquesofScalableandmultithreadedArchitectures.
3.ToApplytheconceptsandtechniquesofparallelandadvancedcomputerarchitecturestodesignmodern
computersystems
CourseOutcomes:
Aftercompletionofthecourse,thestudentshouldbeableto
1.ComputationalmodelsandComputerArchitectures.
2.Conceptsofparallelcomputermodels.
3.ScalableArchitectures,Pipelining,Superscalarprocessors,multiprocessors
UNIT-I
TheoryofParallelism,Parallelcomputermodels,TheStateofComputing,Multiprocessorsand
Multicomputers,MultivectorandSIMDComputers,PRAMandVLSImodels,Architecturaldevelopment
tracks,Programandnetworkproperties,Conditionsofparallelism,ProgrampartitioningandScheduling,
ProgramflowMechanisms,SysteminterconnectArchitectures.
UNIT-II
PrincipalsofScalableperformance,Performancemetricsandmeasures,ParallelProcessing
applications,Speedupperformancelaws,ScalabilityAnalysisandApproaches,Hardware
Technologies,ProcessesandMemoryHierarchy,AdvancedProcessorTechnology,SuperscalarandVector
Processors,MemoryHierarchyTechnology,VirtualMemoryTechnology.
UNIT-III
BusCacheandSharedmemory,Backplanebussystems,CacheMemoryorganizations,Shared-Memory
Organizations,Sequentialandweakconsistencymodels,Pipeliningandsuperscalartechniques,Linear
PipelineProcessors,Non-LinearPipelineProcessors,InstructionPipelinedesign,Arithmeticpipeline
design,superscalarpipelinedesign.
UNIT-IV
ParallelandScalableArchitectures,MultiprocessorsandMulticomputers,Multiprocessorsystem
interconnects,cachecoherenceandsynchronizationmechanism,ThreeGenerationsof
Multicomputers.
UNIT–V
Message-passingMechanisms,MultivetorandSIMDcomputers,VectorProcessingPrincipals,Multivector
Multiprocessors,CompoundVectorprocessing,SIMDcomputerOrganizations,Theconnectionmachine
CM-5
UNIT–VI
Scalable,MultithreadedandDataflowArchitectures,Latency-hidingtechniques,Principalsof
Multithreading,Fine-GrainMulticomputers,ScalableandmultithreadedArchitectures,Dataflowand
hybridArchitectures.
LTP/DC
3003

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
29
TEXTBOOK:
1.AdvancedComputerArchitectureSecondEdition,KaiHwang,TataMcGrawHillPublishers.
REFERENCEBOOKS:
1.ComputerArchitecture,Fourthedition,J.L.HennessyandD.A.Patterson.ELSEVIER.

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
30
SyllabusforB.TechIIIYearIsemester
ElectronicsandComputerEngineering
SOFTWAREREQUIREMENTSANDESTIMATION
(ProfessionalElective–I)
Code:9EC12
Prerequisite:SoftwareProjectManagement
CourseObjectives:
1.Demonstratetheknowledgeofthedistinctionbetweencriticalandnon-criticalsystemsandshouldauthora
softwarerequirementsdocument.
2.Understandthepropercontentsofasoftwarerequirementsdocumentanddistributedsystemarchitectures
andapplicationarchitectures.
CourseOutcomes:
Attheendofthiscoursethestudentwillbeableto
1.Explainneed,practicesandRiskissuesinSoftwarerequirements.
2.DescribeSoftwareRequirementsEngineeringelementssuchasreview,qualityandpriorities.
3.ExplainsoftwareModelingandRequirementsManagement.
4.ApplyEstimationmethodsforsizeusingMarkIIFPA,FullFunctionPoints,LOCEstimation.
5.ApplyCostandScheduleestimationfactorsduringsoftwaredevelopment.
6.ApplytoolsforRequirementsManagementandEstimation.
UNIT-ISoftwareRequirements:WhatandWhyEssentialSoftwarerequirement,Goodpracticesfor
requirementsengineering,Improvingrequirementsprocesses,Softwarerequirementsandriskmanagement
UNIT–IISoftwareRequirementsEngineeringRequirementselicitation,elicitationtechniques,
requirementsanalysis,documentation,review,Softwarequalityattributes,riskreductionthrough
prototyping,settingrequirementspriorities,verifyingrequirementsquality.
UNIT–IIISoftwareRequirementsModeling,AnalysisModels,UseCaseModeling,Dataflowdiagram,
statetransitiondiagram,classdiagrams.
SoftwareRequirementsManagementRequirementsmanagementPrinciplesandpractices,Requirements
attributes,ChangeManagementProcess,RequirementsTraceabilityMatrix,Linksinrequirementschain.
UNITIVSoftwareEstimationComponentsofSoftwareEstimations,Estimationmethods,Problems
associatedwithestimation,KeyprojectfactorsthatinfluenceestimationSizeEstimationTwoviewsof
sizing,FunctionPointAnalysis,MarkIIFPA,FullFunctionPoints,LOCEstimation,andConversion
betweensizemeasures.
UNIT-VEffort,ScheduleandCostEstimationWhatisProductivity?EstimationFactors,Approachesto
EffortandScheduleEstimation,COCOMOII,PutnamEstimationModel,CostEstimation.
UNIT–VIToolsforRequirementsManagementandEstimationRequirementsManagementTools:
Benefitsofusingarequirementsmanagementtool,commercialrequirementsmanagementtool,Rational
Requisitepro,Caliber–RM,implementingrequirementsmanagementautomation.
SoftwareEstimationTools:Desirablefeaturesinsoftwareestimationtools,IFPUG,USC’sCOCOMOII,
andSLIM(SoftwareLifeCycleManagement)Tools.
LTP/DC
3003

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
31
TEXTBOOK:
1.
SoftwareRequirementsandEstimationbyRajeshNaikandSwapnaKishore,TataMcGrawHill.
REFERENCEBOOKS:
1.SoftwareRequirementsbyKarlE.Weigers,MicrosoftPress.
2.ManagingSoftwareRequirements,DeanLeffingwell&DonWidrig,PearsonEducation,2003.
3.Masteringtherequirementsprocess,secondedition,SuzanneRobertson&JamesRobertson,Pearson
Education,2006.
4.EstimatingSoftwareCosts,Secondedition,CapersJones,TMH,2007.
5.PracticalSoftwareEstimation,M.A.Parthasarathy,PearsonEducation,2007.
6.Measuringthesoftwareprocess,WilliamA.Florac&AnitaD.Carleton,PearsonEducation,1999.

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
32
SyllabusforB.TechIIIYearIsemester
ElectronicsandComputerEngineering
CMOSANALOGICDESIGN
(ProfessionalElective–I)
Code:9C518
CourseOutcomes:
ModelvariouscomponentsinCMOSprocesstoestimatetheirperformanceincircuits.
AnalyzeanddesignofMOSanddifferentcurrentmirrorcircuitsincludingWilson,cascadecurrentmirror.
DesignofCMOSAmplifiersincludingDifferential,Cascodeandhighgainamplifierarchitectures.
DesignofCMOSOperationalamplifiersandtomeasurethecharacteristicsofcascade
operational-amplifier.
Applyandanalyzetheperformanceofopenloopanddiscretetimecapacitorcircuits
UNIT–I:MOSDevices:IntroductiontoMOSTransistor,PassiveComponents-Capacitor&Resistor,
IntegratedcircuitLayout
UNIT–II:CMOSDeviceModeling-SimpleMOSLarge-SignalModel,OtherModelParameters,
Small-SignalModelfortheMOSTransistor,ComputerSimulationModels,Sub-thresholdMOSModel.
UNIT–III:AnalogCMOSSub-Circuits:MOSSwitch,MOSDiode,MOSActiveResistor,CurrentSinks
andSources,CurrentMirrorsCurrentmirrorwithBetaHelper,Degeneration,CascodecurrentMirrorand
WilsonCurrentMirror,CurrentandVoltageReferences,BandgapReference.
UNIT–IV:CMOSAmplifiers:Inverters,DifferentialAmplifiers,CascodeAmplifiers,Current
Amplifiers,OutputAmplifiers,HighGainAmplifiersArchitectures.
UNIT–V:CMOSOperationalAmplifiers:DesignofCMOSOpAmps,CompensationofOpAmps,
DesignofTwo-StageOpAmps,Power-SupplyRejectionRatioofTwo-StageOpAmps,CascodeOpAmps,
MeasurementTechniquesofOPAmp.
UNIT–VI:Comparators:CharacterizationofComparator,Two-Stage,Open-LoopComparators,Other
Open-LoopComparators,ImprovingthePerformanceofOpen-LoopComparators,Discrete-Time
Comparators.
TEXTBOOKS:
1.PhilipE.AllenandDouglasR.Holberg,“CMOSAnalogCircuitDesign”,OxfordUniversityPress,
International2ndEdition/IndianEdition,2010.
2.PaulR.Gray,PaulJ.Hurst,S.LewisandR.G.Meyer,“AnalysisandDesignofAnalogIntegrated
Circuits”,WileyIndia,5thEdition,2010.
REFERENCEBOOKS:
●
DavidA.Johns,KenMartin,“AnalogIntegratedCircuitDesign”,WileyStudentEdition,2013.
●
BehzadRazavi,“DesignofAnalogCMOSIntegratedCircuits”,TMHEdition.
●
Baker,LiandBoyce,“CMOS:CircuitDesign,LayoutandSimulation”,PHI.
LTP/DC
3003

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
33
SyllabusforB.TechIIIYearIsemester
ElectronicsandComputerEngineering
COMPUTERORGANIZATION&ARCHITECTURE
(ProfessionalElective–I)
Code:9C519
CourseObjectives:
Thepurposeofthecourseistointroduceprinciplesofcomputerorganizationandthebasicarchitectural
concepts.
Itbeginswithbasicorganization,design,andprogrammingofasimpledigitalcomputerandintroduces
simpleregistertransferlanguagetospecifyvariouscomputeroperations.
Topicsincludecomputerarithmetic,instructionsetdesign,microprogrammedcontrolunit,pipeliningand
vectorprocessing,memoryorganizationandI/Osystems,andmultiprocessors
CourseOutcomes:
Understandthebasicsofinstructionssetsandtheirimpactonprocessordesign.
Demonstrateanunderstandingofthedesignofthefunctionalunitsofadigitalcomputersystem.
Evaluatecostperformanceanddesigntrade-offsindesigningandconstructingacomputer
processorincludingmemory.
Designapipelineforconsistentexecutionofinstructionswithminimumhazards.
Recognizeandmanipulaterepresentationsofnumbersstoredindigitalcomputers
UNIT-I
DigitalComputers:Introduction,BlockdiagramofDigitalComputer,DefinitionofComputer
Organization,ComputerDesignandComputerArchitecture.
RegisterTransferLanguageandMicrooperations:RegisterTransferlanguage,RegisterTransfer,Bus
andmemorytransfers,ArithmeticMicrooperations,logicmicrooperations,shiftmicrooperations,
Arithmeticlogicshiftunit.
BasicComputerOrganizationandDesign:Instructioncodes,ComputerRegistersComputerinstructions,
TimingandControl,Instructioncycle,MemoryReferenceInstructions,Input–OutputandInterrupt.
UNIT-II
MicroprogrammedControl:Controlmemory,Addresssequencing,microprogramexample,designof
controlunit.
CentralProcessingUnit:GeneralRegisterOrganization,InstructionFormats,Addressingmodes,Data
TransferandManipulation,ProgramControl.
UNIT-III
DataRepresentation:Datatypes,Complements,FixedPointRepresentation,FloatingPoint
Representation.
ComputerArithmetic:Additionandsubtraction,multiplicationAlgorithms,DivisionAlgorithms,
Floating–pointArithmeticoperations.DecimalArithmeticunit,DecimalArithmeticoperations.
UNIT-IV
Input-OutputOrganization:Input-OutputInterface,Asynchronousdatatransfer,ModesofTransfer,
PriorityInterruptDirectmemoryAccess.
LTP/DC
3003

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
34
MemoryOrganization:MemoryHierarchy,MainMemory,Auxiliarymemory,AssociateMemory,Cache
Memory.
UNIT-V
ReducedInstructionSetComputer:CISCCharacteristics,RISCCharacteristics.
PipelineandVectorProcessing:ParallelProcessing,Pipelining,ArithmeticPipeline,InstructionPipeline,
RISCPipeline,VectorProcessing,ArrayProcessor.
UNIT-VI
MultiProcessors:CharacteristicsofMultiprocessors,InterconnectionStructures,Interprocessor
arbitration,Interprocessorcommunicationandsynchronization,CacheCoherence.
TEXTBOOKS:
1.ComputerSystemArchitecture–M.MorisMano,ThirdEdition,Pearson/PHI.
REFERENCES:
1.ComputerOrganization–CarHamacher,ZvonksVranesic,SafeaZaky,VthEdition,McGrawHill.
2.ComputerOrganizationandArchitecture–WilliamStallingsSixthEdition,Pearson/PHI.
3.StructuredComputerOrganization–AndrewS.Tanenbaum,4
th
Edition,PHI/Pearson.

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
35
SyllabusforB.TechIIIYearIIsemester
ElectronicsandComputerEngineering
MICROPROCESSORSANDINTERFACE
Code:9DC06
CourseObjectives:Inthiscoursethestudentwilllearn
1.Themicroprocessorandmicrocontrollerarchitecture,instructionssetandproceduresofprogramming.
2.Understandtheassemblylanguageprograms,pindiagramandtimingdiagramsfor8086&8051.
3.Understandandpracticetheinterfacingrelatedapplicationsof8255with8086andserialcommunication.
4.Learntheusageofmultipleinterruptsof8051,USARTarchitecture,RS232.
CourseOutcomes:Aftercompletingthiscourse,Studentswillbeableto
1.Understandingtheconceptsof8086Architecture
2.UnderstandingtheconceptsofInstructionset&developingskillsinwritingassemblylanguageprograms.
3.Abilitytointerfacekeyboard,steppermotorADC,DACto8086using8255
4.Understandingtheconceptsof8051Architecture
5.Exploringtheconceptsofinstructionsetof8051
6.
AbilitytointerfaceLED,LCD,KeyboardDAC,ADCwith8051
UNIT–I:Architectureof8086Microprocessor:Memorysegmentation,BIUandEU.Generalpurpose
registers.8086flagregisterandfunctionof8086Flags.Pindiagramof8086-Minimummodeandmaximum
modeofoperation.TimingDiagram.
UNIT–II:Instructionsetof8086:Addressingmodesof8086.Assemblerdirectives.Simpleprograms,
procedures,andmacros.Assemblylanguageprogramsinvolvinglogical,Branch&Callinstructions,sorting,
evaluationofarithmeticexpressions,stringmanipulation.IntroductiontoDOSandBIOSinterrupts.
Applications:Designofan8-bitCalculator
UNIT–III:Interfacingwith8086:InterfacingwithRAMs,ROMsalongwiththeexplanationoftiming
diagrams.8255PPI–variousmodesofoperation.Interfacingwithkeyboards,ADCs,andDACsStepper
Motor.Interruptstructureof8086.Vectorinterrupttable.Interruptserviceroutines.8259PICArchitecture
andinterfacingcascadingofinterruptcontrolleranditsimportance.
Applications:InterfacingofaTemperaturesensorwith8086
UNIT–IV:The8051Architecture:Architectureof8051Microcontroller,MemoryOrganization.Special
FunctionRegisters.Input/OutputPortsandCircuits,ExternalMemory,CounterandTimers,Serialdata
Input/Output,Interrupts.
UNIT–V:Instructionsetof8051:DataTransferandLogicalInstructions.ArithmeticOperations,
DecimalArithmetic.JumpandCallInstructions,Simpleprograms.
ProgramsbasedonTimerInterrupts,ExternalHardwareInterrupts,SerialcommunicationinterruptsTimers
andcounters..
UNIT–VI:Applicationsof8051:Interfacingwithkeyboards,LEDs,7segmentLEDs,LCDs,Interfacing
withADCs.InterfacingwithDACs,ConceptofMultipleInterrupts.
TEXTBOOKS:
1.Advancedmicroprocessor&Peripherals-A.K.Ray&K.M.Bhurchandi,TMH,2000.
2.Microprocessorsandinterfacing–DouglasV.Hall,TMH,2
nd
Edition,1999.
3.8051Microcontroller–KennethJ.Ayala,PenramInternational/Thomson,3
rd
Edition,2005.
4.The8051MicrocontrollerAndEmbeddedSystemsUsingAssemblyAndC–Mazidi,Pearson
EducationIndia,2
nd
edition,2008.
LTP/DC
3003

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
36
REFERENCES:
1.Microcomputersystems,The8086/8088FamilyArchitecture,ProgrammingandDesign–Y.Liuand
G.A.Gibson,PHI,2
nd
Edition.
2.8051MicroControllersandEmbeddedSystems–Dr.RajivKapadia,JaicoPublishers.

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
37
SyllabusforB.TechIIIYearIIsemester
ElectronicsandComputerEngineering
DIGITALSIGNALPROCESSING
Code:9CC08
Courseobjectives:Todevelopskillsforanalyzingandsynthesizingalgorithmsandsystemsthatprocessdiscretetime
signals,withemphasisonrealizationandimplementation.
Courseoutcomes:
Afterstudyingthiscourse,thestudentswillbeableto
CO1.DistinguishbetweenCTandDTsignalsandsystemsandunderstandthegrowingneedofDSP.(UNIT-I)
CO2.RepresentperiodicDTsignalsasaFourierseries,non-periodicDTsignalsasaFourierTransformandusea
powerfulmathematicaltoolcalledDFT.AlsoComputetheFourierTransformofDTsignalsusingtheFFT
algorithms.(UNIT-II&III)
CO3.RealizeadigitalIIRfilterandFIRfiltersinseveralformsandstructuresforagiventransferfunctionH(z)and
candesignIIRfilterasperspecifications.(UNIT-IV&V)
CO4.Understandtheneedandimplementthemulti-ratesamplingtechniques.(UNIT-VI)
UNITI:INTRODUCTION:
IntroductiontoDigitalSignalProcessing:Discretetimesignals&sequences,Periodicity,linearshift
invariantsystems,stability,andcausality,Linearconstantcoefficientdifferenceequations-Blockdiagram
representation,Frequencydomainrepresentationofdiscretetimesignalsandsystems.
Applications:ContentsformthefoundationforDSP.
UNITII:DISCRETEFOURIERTRANSFORM:
DiscreteFourierseriesrepresentationofperiodicsequences,Discrete-TimeFourierTransform(DTFT),
DiscreteFouriertransform(DFT):PropertiesofDFT,RelationbetweenZ-transformandDFT,Convolution:
Linearandcircularconvolutions,OverlapaddandOverlapsavemethods,ComputationofDFT.
Applications:AnalysisofDTsignals-PeriodicandAperiodic.
UNITIII:FASTFOURIERTRANSFORMS:
FastFouriertransforms(FFT)-Radix-2decimationintimeanddecimationinfrequencyFFTAlgorithms,
InverseFFT.
Applications:DesignofspectrallyefficientsystemsuchasOFDMsystem.
UNITIV:INFINITEIMPULSERESPONSE(IIR)FILTERS:
AnalogFilterApproximations–ButterworthApproximation,ChebyshevApproximationandtheir
Comparison
IIRDigitalFilters:DesignofIIRDigitalfiltersfromanalogfilters-ImpulseInvariance,Stepinvarianceand
BilinearTransformationmethods,DesignExamples,AnalogtoDigitaltransformations.Basicstructuresof
IIRsystems.
Applications:DesignofIIRdigitalfilterconformingtogivenspecifications.
UNITV:FINITEIMPULSERESPONSE(FIR)FILTERS:
FIRDigitalFilters:CharacteristicsofFIRDigitalFilters,frequencyresponse,DesignofFIRDigitalFilters
usingFourierseriesmethod,WindowingTechnique-Rectangular,Triangular(Bartlett),Hamming,Hanning
andBlackmanwindow,FrequencySamplingtechnique,ComparisonofIIRandFIRfilters.Basicstructures
ofFIRsystems
Applications:DesignofFIRdigitalfilterconformingtogivenspecifications.
UNITVI:MULTI-RATEDIGITALSIGNALPROCESSING:
LTP/DC
2103

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
38
Decimation,Interpolation,SamplingRateConversion.IntroductiontoDSPProcessors.
ApplicationsofMultirateDigitalSignalprocessing:Designofdigitalfilterbanksandquadrature
mirrorfiltersetc.
TEXTBOOKS:
1.DigitalSignalProcessing–AlanV.Oppenheim,RonaldW.Schafer,PHIEd.,2006
2.DigitalSignalProcessing,Principles,Algorithms,andApplications:JohnG.Proakis,DimitrisG.
Manolakis,PearsonEducation/PHI,2007.
3.DigitalSignalProcessing:AModernIntroduction,AshokAmbardar,9
th
IndianReprint,2012,
CengageLearning.
REFERENCEBOOKS:
1.DigitalSignalProcessing:AndreasAntoniou,TATAMcGrawHill,2006
2.DigitalSignalProcessing:MHHayes,Schaum’sOutlines,TATAMc-GrawHill,2007.
3.DSPPrimer-C.BrittonRorabaugh,TataMcGrawHill,2005.
4.FundamentalsofDigitalSignalProcessingusingMatLab–RobertJ.Schilling,SandraL.Harris,
Thomson,2007
5.DiscreteTimeSignalProcessing–A.V.Oppenheim

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
39
SyllabusforB.TechIIIYearIIsemester
ElectronicsandComputerEngineering
AUTOMATAANDCOMPILERDESIGN
Code:9D607
CourseObjectives:Inthiscoursethestudentwilllearn
i.Conceptsoffiniteautomata,phasesofcompiler,regularexpression,toolslikeLEXandYACCtool.
ii.Typesofgrammarsandtheirconcepts,differentTopdownparsing.
iii.AboutBottomupparsingtechniques.
iv.Semanticanalyzerandintermediatecodegeneration.
v.Runtimeenvironmentconcepts.
vi.Typesofcodeoptimizationtechniquesandmachinedependentcodegeneration,todesignacompiler.
CourseOutcomes:Aftercompletingthiscourse,studentshouldbeableto
i.Convertregularexpressionstofiniteautomata,ContextFreeGrammar(CFG)andworkwithLEXandYACC
tool.
ii.ParsetheinputstringusingCFGthroughTopdowntechniques.
iii.ParsetheinputstringusingCFGthroughBottomuptechniques.
iv.Generateintermediatecodefromsyntaxtreeandanalyzesemanticrules.
v.Implementvariousruntimeenvironmentsstrategies.
vi.Generatemachinedependentcodefromoptimizedcode.
UNIT-I
FormalLanguageandRegularExpressions:Languages,DefinitionLanguagesregularexpressions,Finite
Automata–DFA,NFA.ConversionofregularexpressiontoNFA,NFAtoDFA.ApplicationsofFinite
Automatatolexicalanalysis,lextools.
Overviewofcompiler–Environment,pass,phase,phasesofcompiler,LexicalAnalyzer,LEXtool,
Bootstrapping.
UNITII
TopDownParsing:Contextfreegrammar,Topdownparsingtechnique,LMD,RMD,Recursivedecent
parsingwithbacktracking,Ambiguousgrammar,Eliminationofleftrecursion,Leftfactoring,
unambiguousgrammar,Predictiveparsing,LL(1).
UNITIII
Bottomupparsing:shiftreduceparserSLR,CLR,LALR,operatorprecedenceparser,LR(0),LR(1),LR(K)
grammar,YACCtool.
UNITIV
SemanticAnalysis:Syntaxdirectedtranslation,S-Attributed,LAttributeddefinition,Typechecker,
equivalenceoftypeexpressions,typeconversions,overloadingoffunctions&operators.
Intermediatecodegeneration:3-addresscodeform,DAG,polishnotation.
UNITV
Runtimeenvironment:Symboltableformat,organizationofblockstructurelanguages,hashing,tree
structuresrepresentationofscopeinformationBlockstructuresandnon-blockstructuresstorageallocation,
static,runtimestackandheapstorageallocations,storageallocationforarrays,stringsandrecords.
UNITVI
Codeoptimization:Optimization,scopeofoptimization,commonsubexpressionelimination,frequency
reduction,strengthreduction,loopoptimization,peep-holeoptimization,copypropagation.
DataflowAnalysis:Dataflowgraphs,dataflowgraphAnalysis,livevariableanalysis.
LTP/DC
3003

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
40
Codegeneration:Machinedependentcodegeneration,objectcodeforms,registerallocation,genericcode
generationalgorithm,DAGforregisterallocation.
Casestudies:JITcompiler.
TEXTBOOKS:
1.IntroductiontoTheoryofcomputation.Sipser,2
nd
Edition,Thomson.
2.CompilersPrinciples,TechniquesandToolsAho,Ullman,Ravisethi,PearsonEducation.
REFERENCEBOOKS:
1.ModernCompilerConstructioninC,AndrewW.AppelCambridgeUniversityPress.
2.CompilerConstruction,LOUDEN,Thomson.

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
41
SyllabusforB.TechIIIYearIIsemester
ElectronicsandComputerEngineering
INTELLECTUALPROPERTYRIGHTS
Code:9IC04
CourseObjective:
Thiscourseisintendedtoimpartawarenessonintellectualpropertyrightsandvariousregulatoryissues
relatedtoIPR
CourseOutcomes:
Attheendofthiscoursethestudentwillbeableto
1.DemonstrateabreadthofknowledgeinIntellectualproperty
2.OverviewofPatents,Searching,fillinganddraftingofPatents
3.Overviewofcopyright&GI.
4.OverviewofTradeMark&TradeSecret,
5.OverviewofIntegratedCircuitandIndustrialDesign.
6.Knowledgeaboutdifferentnationalandinternational:ConventionsandTreatiesGoverningtheIPRs
UNITI:IntroductiontoIPR:Discovery,Invention,Creativity,Innovation,History&Significanceof
IPR,OverviewofIPR-Patent,Copyright,TradeMark,TradeSecret,GI,IndustrialDesign&Integrated
Circuit,Non-patentablecriteria
UNITII:Patents:Patents-PatentabilityCriteria,TypesofPatents-Process,Product&UtilityModels,
SoftwarePatentingandprotection,Patentinfringement-Casestudies-AppleVsSamsung,EnfishLLC
VsMicrosoft,OverviewofPatentsearch-TypesofSearching,Public&PrivateSearchingDatabases,
BasicsofPatentFiling&Drafting,IndianPatentsLaw
UNITIII:CopyrightsandGeographicalIndications:TypesofCopyrights,Procedureforfiling,
copyrightinfringement,CopyrightLaw,GeographicalIndications–TirupatiLaddu,DarjeelingTea,
Basmatirice
UNITIV:TrademarkandTradesecrets:TradeMarks–Commercialimportance,protection,
registration,CaseStudies-SabenaandSubena,CastrolVsPentagon,TradeSecrets-Case
Studies-KentuckyFriedChicken(KFC),Coca-Cola
UNITV:ProtectionofIndustrialDesigns&IntegratedCircuits:IndustrialDesigns–Scope,
protection,filing,infringement;IntegratedCircuits&Layoutdesign,Semiconductors,Unfair
competition,DesignsAct.
UNITVI:InternationalConventions&Treaties:OverviewofWTO,GATT,TRIPS,WIPO,Berne
Convention,Romeconvention,ParisConvention,PatentCooperationTreaty(PCT),MadridProtocol,
BudapestTreaty,Hagueagreement
TEXTBOOKS:
1.DeborahE.Bouchoux,IntellectualPropertyforParalegals–ThelawofTrademarks,Copyrights,
Patents&Tradesecrets,3
rd
Edition,Cengagelearning,2012
2.N.S.Gopalakrishnan&T.G.Agitha,PrinciplesofIntellectualProperty,EasternBookCompany,
Lucknow,2009.
REFERENCEBOOKS:
1.M.M.S.Karki,IntellectualPropertyRights:BasicConcepts,AtlanticPublishers,2009
LTP/DC
3000

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
42
2.NeerajPandey&KhushdeepDharni,IntellectualPropertyRights,PhiLearningPvt.Ltd
3.AjitParulekarandSaritaD‘Souza,IndianPatentsLaw–Legal&BusinessImplications;
MacmillanIndialtd,2006.
4.B.L.Wadehra.LawRelatingtoPatents,TradeMarks,Copyright,Designs&Geographical
Indications;UniversallawPublishingPvt.Ltd.,India2000.
5.P.Narayanan;LawofCopyrightandIndustrialDesigns;EasternlawHouse,Delhi,2010

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
43
SyllabusforB.TechIIIYearIIsemester
ElectronicsandComputerEngineering
MICROPROCESSORSANDINTERFACELAB
Code:9DC62
CourseObjectives:
a.Familiarizethearchitectureof8086processor,assemblinglanguageprogrammingandinterfacingwithvarious
modules.
b.Thestudentcanalsounderstandof8051Microcontrollerconcepts,architecture,programmingandapplicationof
Microcontrollers.
c.StudentabletodoanytypeofVLSI,embeddedsystems,industrialandrealtimeapplicationsbyknowingthe
conceptsofMicroprocessorandMicrocontrollers.
CourseOutcomes:
Analyzeandapplyworkingof8086.
Comparethevariousinterfacetechniques.Analyzeandapplytheworkingof8255,8279,8259,8251,8257ICs
anddesignanddeveloptheprograms.
LearningtheCommunicationStandards.
Cycle-I
IntroductiontoMASM/TASM,KIELIDE,Familiarizationwith8086,8051Kits
8086ALPusingkitandMASM
1.Basicarithmeticandlogicaloperations
2.Codeconversiondecimalarithmeticprograms
3.Stringmanipulationprograms
4.DisplayamessageonthescreenofacomputerusingDOS/BIOSinterrupts.
Cycle–II
Followingperipheralsandinterfacingexperimentstobeimplementedon8086and8051kits
1.A/DandD/Ainterfacing
2.SerialinterfacingwithPC
3.Keyboardanddisplayinterfacing
4.Steppermotorcontroller
5.Trafficlightcontroller
6.RealTimeclockinterfacewith8051using1
2
C
LTP/DC
0021

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
44
SyllabusforB.TechIIIYearIIsemester
ElectronicsandComputerEngineering
DIGITALSIGNALPROCESSINGLAB
Code:9CC75
Prerequisites:SS,PTSP,BasicSimulationLab
CourseObjectives:Aftercompletingthiscourse,thestudentswillbeabletodemonstrate
CO1thefrequencyresponseofagivensystems
CO2DesignofFIR&IIRfiltersandTransformingananalogfiltertoitsdigitalequivalent
CO3Samplingrateconversion,Interpolationanddecimation
CO4TMS320c6713fordifferentalgorithms
SyllabusContent
Toolstobeused:MATLAB,CCStudio,TMS320C6713
1.Impulseresponseoffirstorderandsecondordersystems.
2.ProgramtofindfrequencyresponseofLP/HPfilters(differenceequation/transferfunction).
3.TofindCircularconvolutionofgivensequencewithandwithoutbuiltinfunction.
4.TofindtheDFT/IDFT,FFTofgivenDTsignalswithandwithoutbuiltinfunctions.
5.TofindPowerSpectralDensityofasequence.
6.ToimplementIIRfilter(LP/HP/BP)
a)Butterworthfilter
b)ChebyshevType-IandType-IIfilters
7.TodesignFIRfilter(LP/HP)usingwindowingtechnique
a)Usingrectangularwindow
b)Usingtriangularwindow
c)UsingKaiserWindow
8.Downsamplingandupsamplingofgivensequencebyspecifiedfactor.
9.ConversionofAnalogfiltertoDigitalFilter.
a)impulseinvarianttransformation
b)bilineartransformation
10.GenerationofDTMFsignals
11.Noiseremoval:Addnoiseabove3KHzandthenremove,interferencesuppressionusing400Hz
tone.
ThefollowingexperimentsaretobeimplementedusingCCS
1.StudythearchitectureofDSPchips-TMS320C5X/6XInstructions
2.TofindLinearconvolutionofgivensequence.
3.TofindCircularconvolutionofgivensequence
4.TofindtheDFT&FFTofgivensequence
5.GenerationofDTMFSignals
6.ImplementationofDecimationProcess&InterpolationProcess.
LTP/DC
0042

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
45
SyllabusforB.TechIIIYearIIsemester
ElectronicsandComputerEngineering
AUTOMATAANDCOMPILERDESIGNLAB
Code:9D663
CourseObjectives:
Toprovideanunderstandingofthelanguagetranslationpeculiaritiesbydesigningcompletetranslator
foralanguageusingconceptsusinglexicalanalysertools,parsertechniquesandtools.
CourseOutcomes:
1.ImplementthelexicalanalyzerusinglexicalanalyzergeneratingtoolsuchasLEX.
2.Designtopdownparserforthegivenlanguage
3.DesignbottomupparserforthegivenlanguageusingYACCparsertool.
HardwareandSoftwarerequired:
●AworkingcomputersystemwitheitherWindowsorLinux
●C/C++ProgrammingLanguages
●C/C++compiler
●LEXandYACCtools
LISTOFLABEXECRCISES
1.WriteaprogramtodesignLexicalAnalyzer.
2.WriteaprogramimplementtheLexicalAnalyzerusingLEXTool.
3.Writeaprogramtocheckwhetherthestringbelongstogivengrammarornot.
4.Writeaprogramtocheckwhetherthegivengrammarisleftrecursiveornot.Removeleft
recursionfromleftrecursivegrammar.
5.WriteaprogramforimplementationofPredictiveParser.
6.WriteaprogramtodesignLALRBottomUpParser.
7.WriteaprogramconverttheBNFrulesintoYACCformandwritecodetogenerate
abstractsyntaxtree.
8.WriteaprogramtofindwhethergivenstringisKeywordornot.
9.WriteaprogramtofindwhethergivenstringisIdentifierornot.
10.WriteaprogramtofindFirstFunctioninContextFreeGrammar.
LTP/DC
0021

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
46
SyllabusforB.TechIIIYearIIsemester
ElectronicsandComputerEngineering
COMPREHENSIVEVIVAVOCE
Code:9D672
Pre-Requisites:AllCoursestillthissemester
Oncompletion:
1.Comprehendtheconceptsinthecoreandelectivecourses.
2.Exhibittechnicalknowledgetofaceinterviews.
3.ExhibitlifelongLearningskillsforhighereducationandtopursueProfessionalpractice.
ComprehensiveVivaVocewillbeconductedinThirdyearsecondsemesteri.einSemesterVIfor100
marks.Twointernalexams(oral)of50markseachwillbeconsideredforCIE.TherewillbenoSEEforthis
course.Astudentmustsecure40%ofthetotalmarkstoobtainapassgrade.
LTP/DC
0101

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
47
SyllabusforB.TechIIIYearIIsemester
ElectronicsandComputerEngineering
BANKINGOPERATIONSANDINSURANCE
(OpenElective–I)
Code:9ZC05
CourseObjectives:TomakethestudentsunderstandtheconceptsandprinciplesofIndianBankingandInsurance
BusinessandtheroleofRBIinregulatingtheIndianFinancialSystem.
1.DescribetheIndianBankingSystemindetail
2.GainawarenessabouttheprudentialnormsandcapitalrequirementsofbanksinIndia
3.UnderstandtheroleofRBIasaregulatorofIndianBanking
4.DescribethenewdimensionsandproductsservedbythebankingsysteminINDIA
5.ProvideawarenessonInsuranceindustryanditsprinciples
6.RecognizetheimportanceofregulatoryandlegalframeworkofIRDA
UNITI
INTRODUCTIONTOBANKINGBUSINESS:Introductiontobankingservices-Historyofbanking
businessinIndia,StructureofIndianbankingsystem:Typesofaccounts,advancesanddepositsinabank,
KYCnorms.
UNITII
BANKINGREGULATIONS:BankingSectorReformswithspecialreferencetoPrudentialNorms,
CapitalAdequacyNorms,ClassificationofAssetsandNPA’s,FunctionsofRBI,RoleofRBIinregulating
IndianBanking,BankingOmbudsmanscheme
UNITIII
CREDITCONTROLBYRBI:Definition,ObjectivesofCreditControl,QuantitativemethodsofCredit
ControlbyRBI:BankRatePolicy,OpenMarketOperations,VariationofReserveRatio,Qualitative
methodsofCreditControlbyRBI:FixationofMarginRequirements,RegulationofconsumerCredit,
RationingofCredit,DirectAction,MoralSuasionandPublicity
UNITIV
NEWDIMENSIONSINBANKING:FinancialInclusion–Microfinance,E-Banking:Mobile-Banking,
NetBanking,DigitalBanking,ArtificialIntelligenceinBanking,CIBILScore,NegotiableInstruments:
ChequeTruncationsystem.
UNITV
INTRODUCTIONTOINSURANCE:Introductiontoinsurance,NeedandimportanceofInsurance,
principlesofInsurance,characteristicsofinsurancecontract,typesofinsurance:Lifeinsuranceandits
products,GeneralInsuranceanditsvariants.
UNITVI
INSURANCEBUSINESSENVIRONMENT:Procedureforissuinganinsurancepolicy–Nomination-
SurrenderValue-PolicyLoans–Assignment-RevivalsandClaimSettlement;Insuranceasatax
mitigationtool,RoleofIRDAinInsuranceRegulation.
LTP/DC
3003

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
48
EssentialReadings:
●Varshney,P.N.,BankingLawandPractice,SultanChand&Sons,NewDelhi.
●GeneralPrinciplesofInsuranceHardingandEvantly
●MarkS.Dorfman:RiskManagementandInsurance,Pearson,2009.
References:
●ScottE.HarringamGregoryR.Nichanus:RiskManagement&Insurance,TMH,2009.
●GerogeE.Rejda:PrinciplesofriskManagement&Insurance,9/e,pearsonEducation.2009.
●G.Koteshwar:RiskManagementInsuranceandDerivatives,Himalaya,2008.

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
49
SyllabusforB.TechIIIYearIIsemester
ElectronicsandComputerEngineering
BASICSOFENTREPRENEURSHIP
(OpenElective–I)
Code:9ZC22
CourseObjective:TheobjectiveofthecourseistomakestudentsunderstandthenatureofEntrepreneurship,andits
importancetobusinesstotheengineeringstudents,whichwillallowthemtogettherequiredintuitionandinterestin
startingtheirownstart-up’s
CourseOutcomes:
C01Demonstratethebasicknowledgeandskillsetrequiredforentrepreneurship.[L2]
C02Distinguishbusinessmodelsandtheirvalidationinentrepreneurship.[L4]
C03Examinecostandfinancialstructuresanddecidesuitablepricingstrategies.[L4]
C04Relateteambuildingandprojectmanagementstylestoprojectmanagementandentrepreneurship.[L2]
C05.Identifydifferentmarketingstrategiesandunderstandbusinessregulationsforstartups.[L3]
UNITI:IntroductiontoEntrepreneurship&SelfDiscovery:-DefineEntrepreneurship,
EntrepreneurshipasaCareeroption,FindyourFlow,StockofYourMeans,Characteristics,Qualitiesand
SkillsofEntrepreneurship,Effectuation,PrinciplesofEffectuation,LifeasanEntrepreneur,Storiesof
SuccessfulEntrepreneurs.
UNITII:Opportunity&CustomerAnalysis:-IdentifyyourEntrepreneurialStyle,Methodsoffinding
andunderstandingCustomerProblems,RunProblemInterview,ProcessofDesignThinking,Identify
PotentialProblemsworthSolving,CustomerSegmentation,NicheMarketingandTargeting,Craftyour
ValuesProportions,Customer-drivenInnovation.
UNITIII:BusinessModel&Validation:-IntroductiontoBusinessModels,LeanapproachtoBusiness
ModelCanvas,BlueandRedOceanStrategies,theProblem-SolutionFit,BuildyourSolutionDemo,
SolutionInterviewMethod,IdentifyMinimumViableProduct(MVP),Product-Marketfittest.
UNITIV:Economics&FinancialAnalysis:-RevenueAnalysis,IdentifydifferentRevenueStreamsand
CostsAnalysis–StartupCost,FixedCostandVariableCost,BreakEvenAnalysis,ProfitAnalysis,
IntroductiontoPricing,differentPricingStrategies,SourcesofFinance,BootstrappingandInitial
Financing,PracticepitchingtoInvestorsandCorporate.
UNITV:TeamBuilding&ProjectManagement:-LeadershipStyles,SharedLeadershipModel,Team
BuildinginVenture,RolesandResponsibilitiesofteaminventure,Explorecollaborationtoolsand
techniques,Brainstorming,IntroductiontoProjectManagement,ProjectLifeCycle,CreateaProjectPlan.
UNITVI:Marketing&BusinessRegulations:-Positioning,PositioningStrategies,Branding,Branding
Strategies,SelectingandMeasuringChannels,CustomerAcquisition,SellingProcess,SellingSkills,Sales
Plans.Businessregulations–ListofRequiredRegistrations,ComplianceCheckList,BusinessStructures
andLegalEntities.
LTP/DC
3003

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
50
EssentialReadings:
●RobertDHisrich,MichaelPPeters,DeanAShepherd,Entrepreneurship,SixthEdition,New
Delhi,2006.
●ThomasW.Zimmerer,NormanM.Scarborough,EssentialsofEntrepreneurshipAndSmall
BusinessManagement,FourthEdition,Pearson,NewDelhi,2006
●AlfredE.Osborne,Entrepreneur’sToolkit,HarvardBusinessEssentials,HBSPress,USA,2005.
●MadhurimaLall,ShikhaSahai,Entrepreneurship,ExcelBooks,FirstEdition,NewDelhi,2006.
References:
●S.S.Khanka,EntrepreneurialDevelopment,S.ChandandCompanyLimited,NewDelhi,2007.
●H.Nandan,FundamentalsofEntrepreneurship,PrenticeHallofIndia,FirstEdition,NewDelhi,
2007.
 
S.R.Bhowmik,M.Bhowmik,Entrepreneurship-AtoolforEconomicGrowthAndAkeyto
BusinessSuccess,NewAgeInternationalPublishers,FirstEdition,(formerlyWileyEastern
Limited),NewDelhi,2007.
https://www.wfglobal.org/
https://www.learnwise.org/#/IN/en/home/login,

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
51
SyllabusforB.TechIIIYearIIsemester
ElectronicsandComputerEngineering
DESIGNLITERACYANDDESIGNTHINKING
(OpenElective–I)
Code:9ZC08
CourseObjective:Theobjectiveofthecourseistomakestudentsunderstandthefundamentalconceptsofdesign
thinking,andtofamiliarizewithproductdesignprocessandtomotivatethestudentstoideatenewproductsand
services.
CourseOutcomes:
1.Thestudentsgaintheknowledgeontheinputsrequiredfordesignthinkingandalsogainfamiliarityon
conceptsrelatedtodesignthinking.
2.Thestudentslearnthetechniquesofideageneration
3.Thestudentsgainknowledgeondifferentphasesofdesignthinking
4.Thestudentsrealizetheproductdesignprocess.
5.Thestudentsgainfamiliarityondesignthinkingforservicedesign.
6.Thestudentsgainknowledgeonvariouscasesrelatedtodesignthinking.
UNITI:DesignThinking–IntroductiontoDesignthinking,Principlesofdesignthinking,Benefitsof
designthinking,ApplicationsofDesignthinking,SocialInnovation,ImpactofDesignthinking,Design
thinkingtoolsandtechniques.InnovationandDesignthinking.
UNITII:IdeaGeneration:NewIdeagenerationmethods-PrinciplesofIdeaGeneration,Techniques,
Creativitythinkingtechniquesandtools,typesofcreativethinking,selectideasfromideationmethods.
UNITIII:DesignThinkingFoundations:TheDesignDoubleDiamond:
Discover-Define-Develop-Deliver,User-centricdesignapproaches:Importanceofuser-centricityfor
design,Empathisation,EmpathyMaps,Datacollectionfromusersandforusers,DataValidation
ResponsibleInnovationandEthicalDesign:
UNITIV:ProductDesignProcess:Identificationofopportunities,ProblemStatement,Productplanning,
CharacteristicsofSuccessfulproductDevelopment,Newproductdevelopmentprocess,Stanforddesign
thinkingiterativemodel
UNITV:DesignThinkingforServiceDesign:Attributesofagoodservicedesign,servicedesigntools–
blueprint,customerjourneymappingIdentifyingtheuserneedsinaservice-driveneconomy;Process
FlowsandCustomerExperienceconsiderationsfordesigningandimprovingservices;5Whys;Service
DeliveryPathways
UNITVI:CaseStudiesonDesignthinking:Case1:ArcturusIVbyJohnE.Arnold,Case–2:Howcanwe
makeAItomakethingsbetterforhumans.Case–3:UserCenteredHelmetDesignbyProf.B.K.
Chakravarthy-Part1andPart2;Case–4:ChallengesofReachingaMillionUsersbyProf.ChetanSolanki
andProfJayendranV.
LTP/DC
3003

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
52
EssentialReadings:
1.Brown,T.(2008).Designthinking.Harvardbusinessreview,86(6),84.
2.“InnovationbyDesign",GeraldH.(Gus)Gaynor,AMACOM{AmericanManagement
Association),NYC,2002
3.Ansell,C.,&Torfing,J.(2014).Collaborationanddesign:newtoolsforpublicinnovation.
InPublicinnovationthroughcollaborationanddesign(pp.19-36).Routledge.
4.Lewrick,M.,&Link,P.(2015).Designthinkingtools:Earlyinsightsaccelerate
marketers’success.MarketingReviewSt.Gallen,32(1),40-51.
References:
1.Mæhlum,A.R.(2017).ExtendingtheTILESToolkit-fromIdeationtoPrototyping(Master'sthesis,
NTNU).
2.Norman,D.(2013).Thedesignofeverydaythings:Revisedandexpandededition.Basicbooks.
3.DesignThinking–Aprimer,Prof:Dr.BalaRamadurai,IndianInstituteofTechnology,Madras.
Websites:
1.www.smashingmagazine.com
2.www.ID

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
53
SyllabusforB.TechIIIYearIIsemester
ElectronicsandComputerEngineering
FUNDAMENTALSOFMEASUREMENTSANDINSTRUMENTATION
(OpenElective–I)
Code:9AC44
CourseObjective:
Thebasicprinciplesofallmeasuringinstrumentsandinmeasurementofelectricalandnon-electricalparametersviz.,
Resistance,Inductance,Capacitance,voltage,currentPowerfactor,Power,Energy,Strain,Temperature,Torque,
Displacementetc.andthedifferenttypesofelectricalandnon-electricaltransducers.Itintroducesthedifferentsignal
analyzersandoscilloscopes.
CourseOutcomes
Thestudentshouldbeableto
1.Explaintheprincipleofoperationofdifferenttypesofinstrumentsviz.,PMMC,movingirontypeofinstruments,
therequiredcharacteristicsofaninstrumentingeneral.(L2)
2.DemonstratethePotentialtransformer,Currenttransformers,dynamometertypeofWattmeterandInduction
typeofEnergymeter.(L2)
3.IllustratetheoperationofwattmetertomeasuretheActiveandReactivepower.(L2)
4.ClassifyandusedifferenttechniquesofmeasurementofResistance,InductanceandCapacitancevalues.(L4)
5.DistinguishtheprincipleofoperationofDifferenttypeofdigitalvoltmeters,waveanalyzers,spectrumanalyzers,
CathoderayOscilloscopeandtypesoftransducers.(L4)
UNIT-IMEASURINGINSTRUMENTS-INSTRUMENTTRANSFORMERS:
SignificanceofMeasurement,staticcharacteristicofsystem-Linearity,Sensitivity,Precision,Accuracy-
Classification-Deflecting,ControlandDampingtorques,AmmetersandVoltmeters,PMMC,Movingiron
typeinstruments,ExpressionfortheDeflectingtorqueandControltorque,ErrorsandCompensations,
ExtensionofrangeusingShuntsandSeriesresistance.
UNIT–II:INSTRUMENTTRANSFORMERS
Introduction,advantages,burdenofinstrumenttransformer,CurrentTransformer-errorsincurrent
transformer,Effectofsecondaryopencircuit,Potentialtransformer-errorsinpotentialtransformer,Testing
ofcurrenttransformerswithsilsbee’smethod.
PowerFactorMeters:TypeofP.F.Meters,DynamometerandMovingirontype,1-phand3-phmeters.
UNIT–IIIMEASUREMENTOFPOWER&ENERGY:
Singlephasedynamometerwattmeter-LPFandUPF-Doubleelementandthreeelementdynamometer
wattmeter,Expressionfordeflectingandcontroltorques,Extensionofrangeofwattmeterusinginstrument
transformers,Measurementofactiveandreactivepowersinbalancedandunbalancedsystems,Singlephase
inductiontypeenergymeter,Drivingandbrakingtorques,Testingbyphantomloading,Threephaseenergy
meter.
UNIT-IVMEASUREMENTOFRESISTANCE-MAGNETICMEASUREMENTS-A.C.
BRIDGES:
PrincipleandoperationofD.C.Crompton’spotentiometer,Standardization,Measurementofunknown
resistance,current,voltage.Methodofmeasuringlow-MediumandHighresistance,sensitivityof
LTP/DC
3003

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
54
Wheatstone’sbridge,CareyFoster’sbridge,Kelvin’sdoublebridgeformeasuringlowresistance,
Measurementofhighresistance,lossofchargemethod,Measurementofinductance,QualityFactor,
Maxwell’sbridge,Hay’sbridge,Anderson’sbridge,Owen’sbridge.Measurementofcapacitanceandloss
angle,DesautyBridge,Wien’sbridge,ScheringBridge.
UNIT-VDIGITALVOLTMETERS-SIGNALANALYZERS-CRO:
Digitalvoltmeters,Successiveapproximation,Ramp,Dualslopeintegrationcontinuousbalancetype,
WaveAnalyzers,Frequencyselectiveanalyzers,Heterodyne,ApplicationofWaveanalyzers,Harmonic
Analyzers,TotalHarmonicdistortion,spectrumanalyzers,Basicspectrumanalyzers,Spectraldisplays,Q
meterandRMSvoltmeters.CRO-CathodeRayTube(CRT),Screens,Probes,ApplicationsofCRO,
MeasurementoffrequencyandphaseusingCRO,Blockdiagram.
UNIT-VIMEASUREMENTOFNON-ELECTRICALQUANTITIES:
Transducers-Classificationoftransducers,AdvantagesofElectricaltransducers,Characteristicsand
choiceoftransducers,PrincipleoperationofResistor,Inductor,LVDTandCapacitortransducers,LVDT
Applications,Straingaugeanditsprincipleofoperation,Guagefactor-Thermistors,Thermocouples,
Piezoelectrictransducers,Photovoltaic,Photoconductivecells.Measurementofstrain,GaugeSensitivity,
Displacement,Velocity,Acceleration,Force,Torque,MeasurementofTemperature.
TEXTBOOKS:
1.ElectricalMeasurementsandmeasuringInstruments–E.W.GoldingandF.C.Widdis,5
th
Edition,
WheelerPublishing.
2.TransducersandInstrumentation–D.V.SMurthy,PrenticeHallofIndia,2
nd
Edition.
3.AcourseinElectricalandElectronicMeasurementsandInstrumentation-A.K.Sawhney,
Dhanpatrai&Co.18
th
Edition.
REFERENCEBOOKS:
1.MeasurementsSystems,ApplicationsandDesign–DODoeblin-TataMCGraw-Hill.
2.PrinciplesofMeasurementandInstrumentation–A.SMorris,Pearson/PrenticeHallofIndia.
3.ElectronicInstrumentation-H.S.KalsiTataMCGraw–HillEdition,3
rd
Edition.
4.ModernElectronicInstrumentationandMeasurementtechniques–A.DHelfrickandW.D.Cooper,
Pearson/PrenticeHallofIndia.

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
55
SyllabusforB.TechIIIYearIIsemester
ElectronicsandComputerEngineering
INTRODUCTIONTOADDITIVEMANUFACTURINGPROCESSES
(OpenElective–I)
Code:9BC51
Prerequisites:MetalCutting
CourseObjectives:ToteachstudentsthefundamentalconceptsofAdditiveManufacturing,techniquesinvolvedand
theiradvantagesandlimitationsandvariousapplicationsofthesetechnologiesinrelevantfieldssuchasmechanical,
Bio-medical,Aerospace,electronicsetc.
CourseOutcomes:
1.UnderstandtheAdditivemanufacturingprocessesandtheirrelationshipwithsubtractivemanufacturing
2.Demonstratecomprehensiveknowledgeoftheboardrangeofliquidbasedrapidprototypeprocesses,
devices,capabilitiesandmaterialsthatareavailable
3.Demonstratecomprehensiveknowledgeofthebroadrangeofliquidbasedrapidprototypeprocesses,
devices,capabilitiesandmaterialsthatareavailable
4.ApplytheprinciplesofcastinginAdditivemanufacturingsystems
5.ArticulatethevarioustradeoffsofAdditivemanufacturingsoftwares/dataformatthatmustbemadein
selectingadvances/additivemanufacturingprocesses,devicesandmaterialstosuitparticularproduct
requirements
6.Learnvariousapplicationsofadditivemanufacturing,suchasinarchitecture,art,healthcaredirectpart
productionandmasscustomization
UNIT-I
Introduction:
DevelopmentofAM,FundamentalsofAM,ClassificationofAMS,Advantages,StandardsonAM,
Commonlyusedterms,AMprocesschain
UNIT-IILiquid-basedAdditivemanufacturingSystems:StereolithographyApparatus(SLA),process,
workingprinciple,photopolymers,photopolymerization,Layeringtechnology,laserandlaserscanning,
Applications,AdvantagesandDisadvantages,3DbioprintingSolid-basedAdditivemanufacturing
Systems:,LaminatedObjectManufacturing(LOM):process,workingprinciple,Applications,Advantages
andDisadvantages,FusedDepositionModeling(FDM):workingprinciple,Applications,Advantagesand
Disadvantages
UNIT-III
PowderBasedAdditivemanufacturingSystems:Selectivelasersintering(SLS):workingprinciple,
Applications,AdvantagesandDisadvantages,ColorJetprinting,workingprinciple,Applications,
AdvantagesandDisadvantages,Buildtimecalculations–SLA,FDM,Problems
UNIT-IV
AdditivemanufacturingDataFormats:STLFormat,STLFileProblems,ConsequenceofBuildingValid
andInvalidTessellatedModels,STLfileRepairs:GenericSolution,FeaturesofvariousAMsoftware’slike
LTP/DC
3003

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
56
Magics,Mimics,SolidView,ViewExpert,3DView,Velocity2,Rhino,STLView3DataExpertand3D
doctor.DesignforAM–BasicPrinciplesandPractices
UNIT-V
RapidTooling:IntroductiontoRapidTooling(RT),ConventionalToolingVsRT,NeedforRT.Rapid
ToolingClassification,SprayMetalDeposition,Siliconerubbermolds,Casting-SandCasting,Investment
Casting,evaporativeCasting
Reverseengineering–whatisRE,WhyuseRE,REGenericprocess,OverviewofRE-Softwareand
Hardware,CMMs-applicationsandtypes
UNIT-VI
Applicationsandexamples:Application-MaterialRelationship,ApplicationinDesign,Applicationin
Engineering,AnalysisandPlanning,AerospaceIndustry,AutomotiveIndustry,JewelryIndustry,Coin
Industry,ArtsandArchitecture.MedicalandBioengineeringApplications:Planningandsimulationof
complexsurgery,CustomizedImplantsandProsthesis,DesignandProductionofMedicalDevices,Bionic
ear,dentistry
SuggestedReading:
1.ChuaC.K.,LeongK.F.andLIMC.S,Rapidprototyping;PrinciplesandApplications,WorldScientific
Publications,ThirdEdition,2010.
2.ReverseEngineering:AnIndustrialPerspective,Springer-Verlag,2008.ISBN:978-1-84628-855-5
3.Ian_Gibson_·David_Rosen,Brent_Stucker,AdditiveManufacturingTechnologies3DPrinting,Rapid
Prototyping,andDirectDigitalManufacturing,Springer
4.PaulF.Jacobs,RapidPrototypingandManufacturingASMEPress,1996.

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
57
SyllabusforB.TechIIIYearIIsemester
ElectronicsandComputerEngineering
ARTIFICIALINTELLIGENCEANDDEEPLEARNING
(
ProfessionalElective–II)
Code:9EC13
Prerequisite:MachineLearning
CourseObjectives:
1.TounderstandthedifferenttypesofAIagents
2.KnowvariousAIsearchalgorithms(uninformed,informed,heuristic,constraintsatisfaction,genetic
algorithms)
3.Tounderstandthefundamentalsofknowledgerepresentation(logic-based,frame-based,semanticnets),
inferenceandtheoremproving
4.Knowhowtobuildsimpleknowledge-basedsystems
5.Demonstrateworkingknowledgeofreasoninginthepresenceofincompleteand/oruncertaininformation
6.Abilitytoapplyknowledgerepresentation,reasoning,andmachinelearningtechniquestoreal-world
problems
7.Abilitytocarryoutindependent(orinasmallgroup)researchandcommunicateiteffectivelyinaseminar
setting.
8.Abilitytoapplyconceptsofconvolutionalnetworksindaytodayapplications.
CourseOutcomes:
Aftercompletionofthiscourse,studentwillbeableto
1.Identifydifferenttypesofagentsandtheirrelationshipswiththeenvironment.
2.Demonstratetheapplicationofagentshandlingapplicationsdealingwithconflictresolution
3.Representknowledgeinlogicallevelandalsobeabletoconvertittoaformsuitableforimplementation.
4.DeriveinferencesapplyingrulesofFirstOrderLogic
5.FormulateanapproachforapplicationsinvolvingcompleteandincompletePlanning
andChoosetheappropriatelearningstrategyneededforsolvingagivenproblem.
UNITI
Introduction:AIproblems,Intelligentagents:AgentsandEnvironments,Rationality,Natureof
environments,Structureofagents,Problemsolvingagents,Problemformulation–PlanningApplication–
ClassicalPlanningproblem
UNITII
SearchingandGameTheory:Searchingforsolutions,Searchingwithpartialinformation(Heuristic
search),Greedybestfirstsearch,A*searchConstraintSatisfactionproblem-GamePlaying:Adversarial
search:Games,Minimaxalgorithm,Optimaldecisionsinmultiplayergames,Alpha-Betapruning,
Evaluationfunctions.Casestudies:Tic-tac-toegame
UNITIII
KnowledgeRepresentationandReasoning:LogicalAgents,KnowledgeBasedAgents,Wumpusworld,
Propositionallogic,ResolutionpatternsinpropositionalLogic,Firstorderlogic,Inferenceinfirstorder
logic,propositionalvs.Firstorderinference,UnificationandLifting,Forwardchaining,Backwardchaining,
Resolution
LTP/DC
3003

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
58
UNITIV
UncertainKnowledgeandReasoning:BayesRule,ConceptsofTimeandUncertainty,UtilityFunctions,
ValueofInformation,Valueiteration,Policyiteration,PartiallyObservableMDP
UNIT–V
BASICSOFDEEPLEARNING
Deeplearningarchitectures:ConvolutionalNeuralNetworks:NeuronsinHumanVision-The
ShortcomingsofFeatureSelection-FullDescriptionoftheConvolutionalLayer-MaxPooling-Full
ArchitecturalDescriptionofConvolutionNetworks-ClosingtheLooponMNISTwithConvolutional
Networks--BuildingaConvolutionalNetworkforCIFAR-10-VisualizingLearninginConvolutional
Networks-LeveragingConvolutionalFilterstoReplicateArtisticStyles-LearningConvolutionalFiltersfor
OtherProblemDomains-Trainingalgorithms.
UNITVI
DEEPREINFORCEMENTLEARNING:
DeepReinforcementLearningMastersAtariGames-ReinforcementLearning-MarkovDecision
Processes(MDP)-ExploreVersusExploit-Pole-CartwithPolicyGradients-Q-LearningandDeep
Q-Networks-ImprovingandMovingBeyondDQN.
TEXTBOOKS
1S.RussellandP.Norvig,ArtificialIntelligence:AModernApproach,PrenticeHall,ThirdEdition,
2009.
2.ArtificialIntelligence,3
rd
Edition,PatrickHenryWinston,PearsonEducation,1992.
3.NikhilBuduma,NicholasLocascio,“FundamentalsofDeepLearning:DesigningNext-Generation
MachineIntelligenceAlgorithms”,O'ReillyMedia,2017.
4.IanGoodfellow,YoshuaBengio,AaronCourville,“DeepLearning(AdaptiveComputationandMachine
Learningseries”,MITPress,2017.
REFERENCES:
1.M.TimJones,―ArtificialIntelligence:ASystemsApproach(ComputerScience),Jones
andBartlettPublishers,Inc.;FirstEdition,2008
2.NilsJ.Nilsson,―TheQuestforArtificialIntelligence,CambridgeUniversityPress,2009.
3.WilliamF.ClocksinandChristopherS.Mellish,ProgramminginProlog:UsingtheISOStandard,Fifth
Edition,Springer,2003.
4.GerhardWeiss,―MultiAgentSystems,SecondEdition,MITPress,2013.
5.DavidL.PooleandAlanK.Mackworth,―ArtificialIntelligence:FoundationsofComputational
Agents,CambridgeUniversityPress,2010.
6.Bratko,―Prolog:ProgrammingforArtificialIntelligence,Fourthedition,Addison-WesleyEducational
PublishersInc.,2011.

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
59
SyllabusforB.TechIIIYearIIsemester
ElectronicsandComputerEngineering
DISTRIBUTEDDATABASES
(
ProfessionalElective–II)
Code:9EC14
Prerequisites:DatabaseManagementSystems
CourseObjectives:
1.Toexposetheneedfordistributeddatabasetechnologytoconfrontwiththedeficienciesofthecentralized
databasesystems.
2.Tointroducethebasicprinciplesandimplementationtechniquesofdistributeddatabasesystems.
3.Toequipstudentswithprinciplesandknowledgeofparallelandobject-orienteddatabases.
4.TolearndistributedDBMSarchitectureanddesign,queryprocessingandoptimization,distributed
transactionmanagementandreliability,parallelandobjectdatabasemanagementsystems.
CourseOutcomes:
1.
Understandtheoreticalandpracticalaspectsofdistributeddatabasesystems.
2.
Studyandidentifyvariousissuesrelatedtothedevelopmentofdistributeddatabasesystem.
3.
Understandthedesignaspectsofobject-orienteddatabasesystemandrelateddevelopment.
UNIT-I
Introduction;DistributedDataProcessing,DistributedDatabaseSystem,PromisesofDDBSs,
Problemareas.
DistributedDBMSArchitecture:ArchitecturalModelsforDistributedDBMS,DDMBSArchitecture.
DistributedDatabaseDesign:AlternativeDesignStrategies,DistributionDesignissues,
Fragmentation,Allocation.
UNIT-II
Queryprocessinganddecomposition:Queryprocessingobjectives,characterizationofquery
processors,layersofqueryprocessing,querydecomposition,localizationofdistributeddata.
DistributedqueryOptimization:Queryoptimization,centralizedqueryoptimization,distributedquery
optimizationalgorithms.
UNIT-III
TransactionManagement:Definition,propertiesoftransaction,typesoftransactions,distributed
concurrencycontrol:serializability,concurrencycontrolmechanisms&algorithms,time-stamped&
optimisticconcurrencycontrolAlgorithms,deadlockManagement.
UNIT-IV
DistributedDBMSReliability:Reliabilityconceptsandmeasures,fault-toleranceindistributedsystems,
failuresinDistributedDBMS,local&distributedreliabilityprotocols,sitefailuresandnetwork
partitioning.
UNIT-V
ParallelDatabaseSystems:Paralleldatabasesystemarchitectures,paralleldataplacement,parallelquery
processing,loadbalancing,databaseclusters.
DistributedobjectDatabaseManagementSystems:Fundamentalobjectconceptsandmodels,object
distributeddesign,
LTP/DC
3003

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
60
UNIT-VI
DistributedobjectDatabaseManagementSystems:Architecturalissues,objectmanagement,distributed
objectstorage,objectqueryProcessing.
ObjectOrientedDataModel:Inheritance,objectidentity,persistentprogramminglanguages,
persistenceofobjects,comparisonOODBMSandORDBMS
TEXTBOOKS:
1.M.TamerOZSUandPatuckValduriez:PrinciplesofDistributedDatabaseSystems,PearsonEdn.Asia,
2001.
2.StefanoCeriandGiuseppePelagatti:DistributedDatabases,McGrawHill.
REFERENCEBOOK:
1.HectorGarcia-Molina,JeffreyD.Ullman,JenniferWidom:“DatabaseSystems:TheCompleteBook”,
SecondEdition,PearsonInternationalEdition

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
61
SyllabusforB.TechIIIYearIIsemester
ElectronicsandComputerEngineering
SOFTWAREPROJECTMANAGEMENT
(
ProfessionalElective–II)
Code:9FC13
CourseObjectives:
SoftwareProjectManagementcourseaimstogivethestudentsanunderstandingofthebuildingblocksofsoftware
projectsandinducestheessenceofprojectmanagement.Thespectrumoftopicscoveredinthissubjectincluding
softwarelifecycle,softwareeconomics,artifacts,processes,workflows,architecture,planningetc.helpstrengthenthe
fundamentalsofthestudentenablingthemtohaveadeeperunderstandingofsoftwareprojectmanagement.
CourseOutcomes:
Attheendofthiscoursethestudentwillbeableto
1.ExplainprimitivesofProjectPlanningandevolutionofsoftwareeconomics.
2.Describesoftwareeconomics;reduceSoftwareproductsize,improvementinsoftwareprocesses,improvingteam
effectiveness,improvingautomation,Achievingquality.
3.ExplainLifecyclephasesandArtifactsoftheprocess.
4.DescribeModelbasedsoftwarearchitecturesandWorkFlows.
5.ApplyCheckpointsforaprocesssuchasMajormilestones,MinorMilestonesandapplyworkbreakdown
structuresforaiterativeprocesswithincostandschedule.DescribeProjectOrganizationsandResponsibilities.
6.DescribeAutomationandProjectControlandProcessinstrumentationandexplainFutureSoftwareProject
ManagementsuchasModernProjectProfilesandNextgenerationprojectmanagement.
UNITI:
ConceptofManagement:ManagementDefinition,RoleandResponsibilitiesofManagement,
ManagementinSoftwareIndustry
TypesofSoftwareOrganizations:Start-upcompanies,IndependentSoftwareCompanies,Multi-National
SoftwareCompanies.
ConventionalSoftwareManagement:Thewaterfallmodel,conventionalsoftwareManagement
performance.
EvolutionofSoftwareEconomics:SoftwareEconomics,pragmaticsoftwarecostestimation.
UNITII:
ImprovingSoftwareEconomics:ReducingSoftwareproductsize,improvingsoftwareprocesses,
improvingteameffectiveness,improvingautomation,Achievingrequiredquality,peerinspections.
Theoldwayandthenewway:TheprinciplesofconventionalsoftwareEngineering,principlesofmodern
softwaremanagement,transitioningtoaniterativeprocess.
UNITIII:
Lifecyclephases:Engineeringandproductionstages,inception,Elaboration,construction,transition
phases.
Artifactsoftheprocess:Theartifactsets,Managementartifacts,Engineeringartifacts,programmatic
artifacts.
UNITIV:
Modelbasedsoftwarearchitectures:AManagementperspectiveandtechnicalperspective.WorkFlows
oftheprocess:Softwareprocessworkflows,Iterationworkflows.
UNITV:
Checkpointsoftheprocess:Majormilestones,MinorMilestones,Periodicstatusassessments.Iterative
ProcessPlanning:Workbreakdownstructures,planningguidelines,costandscheduleestimating,Iteration
LTP/DC
3003

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
62
planningprocess,Pragmaticplanning.ProjectOrganizationsandResponsibilities:Line-of-Business
Organizations,ProjectOrganizations,evolutionofOrganizations.
UNITVI:
ProcessAutomation:AutomationBuildingblocks,TheProjectEnvironment.
ProjectControlandProcessinstrumentation:ThesevencoreMetrics,Managementindicators,quality
indicators,lifecycleexpectations,
FutureSoftwareProjectManagement:ModernProjectProfiles,NextgenerationSoftwareeconomics,
modernprocesstransitions.
Casestudy:Thecommandcenterprocessinganddisplaysystem–Replacement(CCPDS-R)
TEXTBOOKS:
1.SoftwareProjectManagement,WalkerRoyce:PearsonEducation,2005.
REFERENCEBOOKS:
1.ManagementConceptsandPractices,TimHannagan,FTPrenticeHall,5thEdition
2.SoftwareProjectManagement,BobHughesandMikeCotterell:TataMcGraw-HillEdition.
3.SoftwareProjectManagement,JoelHenry,PearsonEducation.
4.SoftwareProjectManagementinpractice,PankajJalote,PearsonEducation.2005

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
63
SyllabusforB.TechIIIYearIIsemester
ElectronicsandComputerEngineering
VLSIPHYSICALDESIGN
(
ProfessionalElective–II)
Code:9C622
ThiscourseisintroducedtohelpVLSIcareeraspirantsinthefieldofVLSIPhysicalDesign.Itcoverscompletedetails
fromVLSIdesignspecificationtillVLSIICphysicaldesignflow,helpstoacquiresufficientskillsasneededby
Industry.
CoursemodulescoverindustryneededindepthknowledgetohandlechallengesinVLSIBackEndFlow.Studentswill
learncompleteknowledgefromnetlisttoGDS2,byworkingonadvancedlowernanometertechnologynodes.
ThecoursewillbenefitVLSIEngineersseekingtoenterintoVLSIbackenddesignjob.Inthisrole
engineerswillbeworkingforBlock&fullchiplevelPhysicalDesignImplementation.
ThemainfocusofthecourseistomakestudentsunderstandphysicaldesignofICfromnetlistthroughGDSII,
creatingphysicallayoutrepresentationforeachlogicalfunctionwithinblockstoenableICfabricationprocess.
Throughthiscourseemphasiswillbegivenonlearningthroughpracticalbackedbytheoreticalconceptstaught
duringclassroom&extendedlabsessions.
PrerequisiteCourses-DigitalLogicDesign,VLSIandDigitalDesignThroughVerilog
CADTool-Cadence-Innovus,Tempus,Genus,Xcelium,andOthers..
Units1-Introduction
OverviewofASIC/SOCdesignflow,DigitalDesignConceptsandPhysicalDesignflowsetup.
ReviewofASICfundamentals&fabricationmethodologies.DesignStrategies-a)Simulation
andsynthesisissues,b)RTLdesignstrategies,c)Statictiminganalysis.
Units2-DesignStandardCellLibraries
Designofcombinationalcircuits,Implementationandanalysisofcombinationalcircuitslike,adders,
comparator,multiplieretc.,Designofsequentialcircuits(SynchronousandAsynchronus),DesignofFinite
StateMachines(FSM).
Designdatapreparation,processtechnologiesandstandardcelllibraries.Understandingofstandardcell
technologyparameters,netlistgenerationandtechnologymapping.ReviewingtimingconstraintsandIO
constraints.LowpowerandlowareadesignconceptsExercisesonCadenceTool-WritingRTLforASIC
designflow,UnderstandASICDesignFlow
with4-bitCounterDesign
Units3-StaticTimingAnalysis
IntroductiontoSTA,ComparisonwithDTA,TimingPathandConstraints,Differenttypesofclocks,Clock
domainandVariations,ClockDistributionNetworks,Howtofixtimingfailure,Introductionstotiming
staticanddynamichazards,Pathdelay,Gatedelay,Metastabilitystates,Sequentialtimingdelayslike
set-uptime,holdtime,Maximumfrequency,violations,slew,slack,Delayanalysis,Sequentiallogicpadto
setup,padtopad,clktonextReg,Regtoo/pandRegtoReg.Violationswrtsequentialcircuit.
LTP/DC
3003

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
64
Units4-DesignFloorPlanning-PowerPlanning
Designplanforhierarchicalandflatdesignimplementation,betterpartitiontechniquesandflowsetup.
SpecialcellsandIOcellsusageplanning,congestionremovaltechniquesandimplementationconstraint
setup.Understandingvariousfloorplanningtechniques,settingupguidelinesforbetterfloorplanningand
meetingdesigngoals.IOPADplacementplanning,powerplanning.Addingpowerringsandpowermesh.
Units5-ClockTreeSynthesisandRouting
Implementationofclocktreeinplaceddesign,understandingvariousaspectsoftimingparameterslike
clocksetup/hold,skewandlatencyissues,Addingbuffersinclocktreeandimplementingclocktree.
Analyzingtimingreportsafterclocktreesynthesisandfixingissues.Varioustypesofrouting,trialroute,
specialroute,globalroutinganddetailedrouting.Analyzingrouteddesigncheckingpostrouteddesign
issues,DRCchecks,timingchecks,optimizationofroutingconstraints
Units6-DesignChecksandSignoff
Doingcompletepathandmodulebasedtiminganalysis,checkingtimingoptimizerreports,identifying
failingpaths,fixingissues.Extractingcapacitortablevaluesforthedesign.IRdropandelectromigration
analysis.PerformDRC,LogicalEquivalencechecking,generatingdetailedtiming/powerreports,
generatingpowerreports.GDS-IIgeneration.
Books
PhysicalDesignEssentials:AnASICDesignImplementationPerspectivebyKhosrowGolshan,ISBN
0-387-36642-3

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
65
SyllabusforB.TechIIIYearIIsemester
ElectronicsandComputerEngineering
EMBEDDEDCPROGRAMMING
(
ProfessionalElective–II)
Code:9C623
CourseObjectives:
Theobjectivesofthiscourseare
ToprovidebasicknowledgeinembeddedsystemdesignusingEmbeddedC.
TomakethelearnersunderstandconceptandapplicationsofEmbeddedCProgramminginvariousfields
includingindustrialautomation..
CourseOutcomes:Afterstudyingthiscourse,thestudentswillbeableto
CO1DemonstratetheuseofdevelopmentsoftwareforaparticularapplicationandchoosingappropriateOS.
CO2Understandingandbuildingbasicembeddedsystemusing8051.Understandingitsdesign
CO3Designofembeddedsystemsandimplementationofswitchreading.
CO4DemonstratetheconceptsofOOP’stheoryinheritanceandfunctionsinembeddedCtosupportmodular
programming.
CO5LearningtheneedforrealtimeimplementationinEmbeddedC..
CO6Casestudyof‘IntruderAlarm”toachihverealtimehandson.
SyllabusContent
UNIT–I:
ProgrammingEmbeddedSystemsinC
Introduction,Whatisanembeddedsystem,Whichprocessorshouldyouuse,Whichprogramming
languageshouldyouuse,Whichoperatingsystemshouldyouuse,Howdoyoudevelopembeddedsoftware,
Conclusions
UNIT–II:
Introducingthe8051MicrocontrollerFamily
Introduction,What’sinaname,TheexternalinterfaceoftheStandard8051,Resetrequirements,Clock
frequencyandperformance,Memoryissues,I/Opins,Timers,Interrupts,Serialinterface,Power
consumption,Conclusions
UNIT–III:
ReadingSwitches
Introduction,Basictechniquesforreadingfromportpins,Example:Readingandwritingbytes,Example:
Readingandwritingbits(simpleversion),Example:Readingandwritingbits(genericversion),Theneed
forpull-upresistors,Dealingwithswitchbounce,Example:Readingswitchinputs(basiccode),Example:
Countinggoats,Conclusions
UNIT–IV:
AddingStructuretotheCode
Introduction,Object-orientedprogrammingwithC,TheProjectHeader(MAIN.H),ThePortHeader
(PORT.H),Example:Restructuringthe‘HelloEmbeddedWorld’example,Example:Restructuringthe
goat-countingexample,Furtherexamples,Conclusions
LTP/DC
3003

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
66
UNIT–V:
MeetingReal-TimeConstraints
Introduction,Creating‘hardwaredelays’usingTimer0andTimer1,Example:Generatingaprecise50ms
delay,Example:Creatingaportablehardwaredelay,WhynotuseTimer2?,Theneedfor‘timeout’
mechanisms,Creatinglooptimeouts,Example:Testinglooptimeouts,Example:Amorereliableswitch
interface,Creatinghardwaretimeouts,Example:Testingahardwaretimeout,Conclusions
UNIT–VI:
CaseStudy:IntruderAlarmSystem
Introduction,Thesoftwarearchitecture,Keysoftwarecomponentsusedinthisexample,runningthe
program,thesoftware,Conclusions
TEXTBOOKS:
1.
EmbeddedC-MichaelJ.Pont,2
nd
Ed.,PearsonEducation,2008
REFERENCEBOOKS:
1.PICmicroMCUC-Anintroductiontoprogramming,TheMicrochipPICinCCSC-NigelGardner

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
67
SyllabusforB.TechIVYearIsemester
ElectronicsandComputerEngineering
EMBEDDEDANDREALTIMESYSTEMS
Code:9D708
CourseObjective-Inthiscoursethestudentwilllearnabout
i.EmbeddedSystemdesignprocessusingARMProcessor
ii.ARMinterfacingwithvariousbusprotocols
iii.Conceptsandconstraintsrelatedtoreal-timesystems
CourseOutcomes-Aftercompletingthiscourse,studentshouldbeableto
i.Identifyandsummarizethecharacteristicsandchallengesofdesigninganembeddedsystem
ii.UtilizeandapplyARMarchitectureforEmbeddedSystemDesign
iii.ARMArchitectureandProgramming(AssemblyandC)
iv.DesignsimpleinputoutputhardwareinterfacesusingARM
v.Explaintheconceptsanddesignrequirementsrelatedtoarealtimesystems
vi.Gettingembeddedsoftwareintotargetsystem–Debugging
UNIT–I
EmbeddedSystemsanditsApplications:EmbeddedSystemDesignProcess,Designchallenge,
ApplicationsofEmbeddedSystems(Chapter1Vahid)ARMArchitectures:ARMDesignPhilosophy,
Registers,ProgramStatusRegister,InstructionPipeline,InterruptsandVectorTable,ArchitectureRevision,
ARMProcessorFamilies(Chapter1&2AndrewN.Sloss)
UNIT–II
ARMInstructionSet:DataProcessingInstructions,AddressingModes,Branch,Load,StoreInstructions,
PSRInstructions,ConditionalInstructions.(Chapter3AndrewN.Sloss)
UNIT-III
ThumbInstructionSet:RegisterUsage,OtherBranchInstructions,DataProcessingInstructions,
Single-RegisterandMultiRegisterLoad-StoreInstructions,Stack,SoftwareInterruptInstructions(Chapter
4AndrewN.Sloss)
UNIT–IV
ARMProgramming:SimpleCprogramsusingfunctioncalls,pointers,structures,integerandfloatingpoint
Arithmetic,Assemblycodeusinginstructionscheduling,RegisterAllocation,ConditionalExecutionand
Loops.(chapter5AndrewN.Sloss)
UNIT–V
InterfacingwithARM:LCDInterfacing,StepperMotorInterfacing,DCmotorInterfacingUsingPWM,
I2CandSPIprotocol.
NetworkedEmbeddedSystems:BusProtocols,I2Cbus,CANbus,SPIprotocol,EthernetEnabledSystems,
DesignExample-ElevatorController.(chapter8Wolf)
UNIT–VI
IntroductiontoReal-TimeSystems:TasksandTaskStates,TasksandData,Semaphores,andSharedData;
MessageQueues,MailboxesandPipes,TimerFunctions,Events,MemoryManagement,InterruptRoutines
inanRTOSEnvironmentBasicDesignUsingaReal-TimeOperatingSystem:Principles,Semaphoresand
Queues,HardReal-TimeSchedulingConsiderations,SavingMemoryandPower,AnexampleRTOS
uC-OS/Vx-Works/RTLinux;
LTP/DC
3003

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
68
TEXTBOOKS:
1.ComputersandComponents:principlesofembeddedcomputingsystemdesign,WayneWolf,Elseveir.
2.EmbeddedSystemDesign–AUnifiesHardware/Softwareintroduction-FrankVahid,TonyD.
Givargis,JohnWiley,2002.
3.ARMSystemsDeveloper’sGuides-Designing&OptimizingSystemSoftware–AndrewN.Sloss,
DominicSymes,ChrisWright,Elsevier
4.AnEmbeddedSoftwarePrimer,DavidE.Simon,PearsonEducation.
5.ARMreferencemanual.
REFERENCES:
1.EmbeddedSystems,RajKamal,TMH.
2.LPC2148ARM7MicrocontrollerManual.
3.ARMMicrocontrollerInterfacingHardwareandSoftware,WarwickASmith,Elkator
4.ARMMicrocontrollerPart1:35ProjectsforBeginners,BertVanDam,Elkator

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
69
SyllabusforB.TechIVYearIsemester
ElectronicsandComputerEngineering
VLSIDESIGN
Code:9D709
CourseObjective-Inthiscoursethestudentwilllearnabout
i.ICfabricationprocessofvarioustechnologiesandtounderstandtheelectricalpropertiesofMOS
transistor.
ii.VariousLayersandlayoutsforadifferenttechnologydesignrulesandhowscalingimpactsits
performance.
iii.DesignofvariouscombinationalandsequentialcircuitsusingMOStransistorsandaboutCMOStesting
CourseOutcomes-Aftercompletingthiscourse,studentshouldbeableto
i.UnderstandtheexistingdevicetechnologiesandICfabricationprocess
ii.ExploreandanalyzetheelectricalpropertiesofMOSdevice&Inverterdesignandanalysis
iii.Dophysicaldesignofbasiclogicgates,combinationalandsequentialcircuits
iv.AnalyzetheparaciticeffectonICpowerandperformance
v.Designmemorycellsandbasicdata-pathunits
vi.ExploreontheneedfortestinganddesignverificationofVLSIcircuits.
UNITI
INTRODUCTIONTOMOSTECHNOLOGIES:MOS,PMOS,NMOS,CMOS&BiCMOS
INTRODUCTIONTOICTECHNOLOGYANDFABRICATIONPROCESS:VLSIDesignFlow,
Oxidation,Lithography,Diffusion,IonImplantation,Metallisation,Encapsulation,Probetesting,
IntegratedResistorsandCapacitors[T1-CH1,2&3].
Application–CMOSICManufacturing
UNITII
BASICELECTRICALPROPERTIES:BasicElectricalPropertiesofMOSandBiCMOSCircuits:
Ids-Vdsrelationships,MOStransistorthresholdVoltage,gm,gds,FigureofMerit(ω
o
),Zpu/Zpd,Latch-Up
inCMOS,PassTransistors[T1-CH2]
INVERTERS:NMOSInverter,VariousPull-Ups,CMOSInverterAnalysisandDesign,Bi-CMOS
Inverters[T1-CH2]
UNITIII
CIRCUITDESIGNPROCESSES:MOSLayers,StickDiagrams,Lamda-basedCMOSDesignrulesfor
Wires,ContactsandTransistors,LayoutDiagramsforNMOSandCMOSInvertersandGates,Scalingof
MOScircuits,LimitationsofScaling.[T1-CH3]
GATES:CMOSLogicGatesandStructures,Switchlogic,LayoutDiagramsGates[T1-CH5]
Application–ICPhysicalDesign–NANDandNOR
UNITIV
DELAYS:SheetResistanceR
s
anditsconcepttoMOS,AreaCapacitanceUnits,Calculations- C
g
,
τ-Delays,DrivinglargeCapacitiveLoads,WiringCapacitances,Fan-inandfan-out[T1-CH4&5,
T2-CH4]
UNITV
MEMORYANDSUBSYSTEMDESIGN:LatchesandRegisters[T2-CH7],Clockingstrategies(Single
Phase)[T1-CH5.5],Memorycells(SRAM&DRAM),Adders,Shifter,MultipliersandALUs[T1-CH8]
Applications–SRAMBasedFPGAsandMultiplyandAccumulate(MAC)Units
LTP/DC
3003

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
70
UNITVI
INTRODUCTIONTOCMOSTESTING:CMOSTesting,Needfortesting,TestPrinciples,Design
StrategiesforTest,ChiplevelTestTechniques,System-levelTestTechniques[T1-CH7]
Applications–ImplementationofbasicATPG
TEXTBOOKS:
1.PrinciplesofCMOSVLSIDesign-WesteandEshraghian,PearsonEducation,SecondEdition,
2009.
2.DigitalIntegratedCircuits:ADesignPerspective-JohnM.Rabaey,2/E,2002
REFERENCES:
1.ChipDesignforSubmicronVLSI:CMOSLayout&Simulation,-JohnP.Uyemura,Thomson
Learning.
2.IntroductiontoVLSICircuitsandSystems-John.P.Uyemura,JohnWiley,2003.
3.EssentialsofVLSIcircuitsandsystems–KamranEshraghian,EshraghianDouglesandA.Pucknell,
PHI,2005Edition.
4.ModernVLSIDesign-WayneWolf,PearsonEducation,3rdEdition,1997.
5.VLSITechnology–S.M.SZE,2
nd
Edition,TMH,2003.

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
71
SyllabusforB.TechIVYearIsemester
ElectronicsandComputerEngineering
CYBERSECURITYANDCYBERLAWS
Code:9FC07
Prerequisite:Nil
CourseObjectives:
1.Tolearnfundamentalsofcryptographyanditsapplicationtonetworksecurity.
2.Tounderstandnetworksecuritythreats,securityservices,andcountermeasures.
3.Tolearncomputersecurity,Internet,E-commerceandE-governancewithreferencetoFree
4.MarketEconomy
5.TolearnInternationalEffortsrelatingtoCyberspacelawsandCybercrimes
6.TolearnLawrelatingtoelectronicrecordsandintellectualpropertyrightsinIndia
7.Tounderstandethicallawsofcomputerfordifferentcountries.
8.TolearnPenalties,CompensationandOffencesundertheCyberspaceandInternetinIndia
9.TolearnMiscellaneousprovisionsofITActandConclusions
CourseOutcomes:
Attheendofthiscoursethestudentwillbeableto
1.FamiliarizethecryptographicproceduresandUnderstanditsprimitives
2.OutlineSecuritypolicyinLegislationandComprehendE-Commerceframework,modelsanditsassociated
threats
3.JustifytheroleofelectronicsignaturesinE-Commerceandsummarizethevariouslawsrelatingtoit.
4.Categorizeinternationalcyberlawsandcybercrimes.
5.ExplorePenalties,CompensationandAdjunctionofviolationsofprovisionsofITAct2000andOutlinethe
offencesundertheCyberspacelawandtheInternetinIndia
UNIT-I
IntroductiontocyberSecurity,cryptography,TypesofAttacks,SecreteKeyCryptography
Introduction:Cyberattacks,DefenseStrategiesandTechniquesMathematicalbackgroundfor
Cryptography:Moduloarithmetic,Thegreatestcommondivisor,UsefulAlgebraicStructures,Chinese
RemainderTheoremBasicsofCryptography:SecretversusPublickeyCryptography,Typesofattacks,
ElementarysubstitutionCiphers,ElementaryTranspositionCiphers,OtherCipherPropertiesSecreteKey
Cryptography:ProductCiphers,DESConstruction,ModesofOperation,MACandotherApplications,
Attacks,LinearCryptanalysis.
UNIT-II
IntroductiontoComputerSecurity,Internet,E-commerceandE-governancewithreferencetoFree
MarketEconomy
Definition,Threatstosecurity,Governmentrequirements,InformationProtectionandAccessControls,
Computersecurityefforts,Standards,ComputerSecuritymandatesandlegislation,Privacyconsiderations,
Internationalsecurityactivity,ConceptualFrameworkofE-commerce:governance,theroleofElectronic
SignaturesinE-commercewithReferencetoFreeMarketEconomyinIndia.
UNIT-III
LawrelatingtoelectronicrecordsandintellectualpropertyrightsinIndia
LegalaspectsofElectronicrecords/Digitalsignatures,Cyberlaws,therolesandregulationsofCertifying
AuthoritiesinIndia,ProtectionofIntellectualPropertyRightsinCyberspaceinIndia.
UNIT-IV
InternationalEffortsrelatingtoCyberspacelawsandCybercrimes
InternationaleffortsrelatedtoCyberlaws,CouncilofEurope(COE)conventiononCyberCrimes.
LTP/DC
2002

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
72
UNIT-V
Penalties,Compensation
Penalties,CompensationandAdjunctionofviolationsofprovisionsofITAct2000andjudicialreview.
UNIT-VI
OffencesundertheCyberspace,InternetinIndiaandMiscellaneousprovisionsofITActand
Conclusions
SomeimportantoffencesundertheCyberspacelawandtheInternetinIndia,Otheroffencesunderthe
InformationTechnologyActinIndia,TheroleofElectronicEvidenceandmiscellaneousprovisionsofthe
ITAct.
TEXTBOOK:
1.NetworksecurityandCryptographybyBernardMenezesCENGAGELearningPublications,2010.
2.CyberLawsandITProtection,HarishChander,PHI,2012.
REFERENCEBOOKS:
1.DebbyRussellandSr.G.TGangemi,"ComputerSecurityBasics(Paperback)”,2ndEdition,O’Reilly
Media,2006.
2.WenboMao,“ModernCryptography–TheoryandPractice”,PearsonEducation,NewDelhi,2006.
3.CyberspaceandCybersecurity,GeorgeKostopoulos,AuerbachPublications,2012.
4.CyberForensics:AFieldManualforCollecting,Examining,andPreservingEvidenceofComputer
Crimes,SecondEdition,AlbertMarcella,Jr.,DougMenendez,AuerbachPublications,2007

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
73
SyllabusforB.TechIVYearIsemester
ElectronicsandComputerEngineering
EMBEDDEDSYSTEMSLAB
Code:9D764
LabObjective-Inthislabthestudentwilllearnabout
i.ARMArchitectureandProgramming(AssemblyandC)
ii.ARMinterfacingwithvariousbusprotocols
iii.Conceptsandconstraintsrelatedtoreal-timesystems
iv.Developinginnovativeprojects
LabOutcome:
Aftercompletionofthiscourse,thestudentshouldbeabletodesignsimpleinputoutputhardwareinterfaces
usingARMLPC2148
CYCLE–I:ExperimentsbasedonARMLPC2148Microcontrollers
1.SerialDataTransmissionusingARMmicrocontrollerindifferentmodes.
2.LCDinterfacetoARM.
3.ADC,DACinterfacebasedexperimentutilizinginternalADC&DACforARMMicrocontroller.
4.DCMotorSpeedControlusingPWMusingARM7.
CYCLE–II:ExperimentsusingI
2
C,SPIserialcommunicationusingARMMicrocontroller
5.ProgramtodemonstrateI
2
CinterfaceserialEEPROM.
6.ProgramtodemonstrateSPIinterfaceforSD-MMCcardinterface.
7.PortingofRTOSonARMMicrocontroller.
8.ExperimentsbasedonRTOS:sendingamessagetoPCthroughserialportby3differenttaskson
prioritybases.
9.CasestudyonEmbeddedLinux/Vx-Works/
 
COS-II
10.CasestudyonCrossCompiler/Assemblertools.
LTP/DC
0031.5

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
74
SyllabusforB.TechIVYearIsemester
ElectronicsandComputerEngineering
VLSILAB
Code:9D765
LabObjective:
TofamiliarizestudentswithVLSICADTools(Xilinx,MicrowindandNGSPICE).
TomakestudentsunderstandandimplementdigitallogicgatesandcircuitsusingSPICEandVerilogHDL.
TointroducethestudenttophysicaldesignbyimplementinglayoutsusingMicrowind.
TomakestudentsimplementcombinatorialandsequentialdesignsonFPGAboards(SPARTAN3)usingXilinx
tools.
LabOutcome:
ThiscourseprovidesthedesignofvariousdigitalcircuitsusingdifferentVLSIsimulationsoftwaretoolslikeXilinx
andMicrowind.Theoutcomesofthiscourse(i)tolearnVerilogHDLandimplementdigitalcircuitsonFPGA
usingXilinxtools.(ii)TodrawandsimulatelayoutfordigitallogicgatesusingMicro-windtool
Toolstobeused:Xilinx,MicorWind
Part-A
1.IntroductiontoMicrowindandAnalysisofCMOS0.25micronTechnologyMOSFETs
2.CMOS0.25micronTechnologyInverterCharacteristicsandlayoutinMicrowind
3.LayoutofBasicGatesandaComplexGateusingCMOS0.25andlayoutinMicrowind
4.LayoutofMultiplexers
Part-B
COMBINATIONALLOGIC
1.ImplementationofLogicGates
2.ImplementationofAdders
A)HalfAdder
B)FullAdder
C)BinaryAdder
3.ImplementationofEncoderandDecoder
a)Implementationof8-3Encoder
b)Implementationof3-8Decoders
4.ImplementationofMultiplexerandDemultiplexer
a)Implementationof8x1multiplexer
b)Implementationof1x8demultiplexer
5.Implementationofcodeconverters(graytobinaryandbinarytogray,excess-3)
6.ImplementationofALU
SEQUENTIALLOGIC
7.ImplementationofFlip-flops
a)D-FLIPFLOPb)T-FLIPFLOP
c)JK-FLIPFLOPd)RS-FLIPFLOP
8.ImplementationofCounters
9.Implementationof8-BitShiftRegister
10.ImplementComplexmemorymodules-RAM,FIFO,andLIFO
Part-CLabProject–
1.FPGAbasedtrafficlightcontrollerusingVerilogHDL
2.FPGAbasedBeverageVendingMachine
3.FPGAbasedUARTserialcommunicationinterface
4.Implement8-bit3-stagepipelineprocessor
LTP/DC
0031.5

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
75
SyllabusforB.TechIVYearIsemester
ElectronicsandComputerEngineering
SUMMERINDUSTRYINTERNSHIP-II
Code:9D774
CourseObjective:
Thestudentsundergoindustrialtrainingsothathe/shebecomeindustry-ready.
CourseOutcomes:
Attheendofthetraining,thestudentisableto
1.Selectthereal-timeproblemintheindustry.
2.Analyzetherequirementswithrespecttotheproblemstatement
3.Designtheoptimalsolutionfortheproblem.
4.Implementthesolutionusingtheappropriatemoderntools.
5.Presentandsubmitthereport
Studentshallcarryouttheprojectinindustryduringsummervacationfor3-6weeks.Thereisinternaland
externalEvaluation.InternalEvaluationcarries40marksandexternalEvaluationcarries60marks,Total
100marks.
PatternofCIEforSummerIndustryInternships–40marks
S.NoDescriptionMarks
1Presentation15
2InternalEvaluation15
3Report10
Total40
PatternofSEEforSummerIndustryInternships–60Marks
S.NoDescriptionMarks
1Presentation10
2Demonstration/Technology40
3Report10
Total60
LTP/DC
0021

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
76
SyllabusforB.TechIVYearIsemester
ElectronicsandComputerEngineering
FINANCIALMARKETSANDSERVICES
(OpenElective-II)
Code:9ZC15
CourseObjective:TheobjectiveofthecourseistoprovidestudentsanunderstandingofFinancialMarketsandthe
ServicesofferedinIndianFinancialSystemwithinthisframework.
CourseOutcomes:
1.UnderstandthestructureofIndianFinancialSystemandtheinvestmentObjectives
2.Understandtheroleofmoneymarketanditsinstruments
3.ProvideawarenessaboutIndianCapitalMarkets.
4.DescribevariousFundbasedfinancialservicesprovidedinIndia
5.GainknowledgeonIndianMutualFundIndustry.
6.DescribevariousfeebasedfinancialservicesprovidedinIndia
UNITI
INTRODUCTION:Investment–InvestmentAttributes,StructureofIndianFinancialSystem,Financial
Markets,ClassificationofFinancialMarkets,FinancialSectorreforms-1991.
UNITII
FINANCIALANDSECURITIESMARKETS:RoleandfunctionsofSEBI,Structureandfunctionsof
CallMoneyMarket,GovernmentSecuritiesMarket–T-billsMarket,CommercialBillsMarket,
CommercialpaperandCertificateofDeposits.
UNITIII
CAPITALMARKETS:SecuritiesMarket–OrganizationandStructure,Listing,TradingandSettlement,
BuyingandSellingofshares,StockMarketQuotations,StockMarketIndices,SEBIandRegulationof
PrimaryandSecondaryMarkets.
UNITIV
FUNDBASEDFINANCIALSERVICES:LeaseFinance,HirepurchaseFinance,Factoring-Definition,
Functions,Advantages,Evaluation,Forfeiting,BillsDiscounting,VentureCapitalFinancing.
UNITV
MUTUALFUNDS:Definition,StructureandfunctioningofUnitTrustofIndiaandMutualFunds,Types
ofMutualFundSchemes,GrowthofIndianMutualfundsandtheirRegulation,RoleofAMFI.
UNITVI
FEEBASEDFINANCIALSERVICES:StockBroking,CreditRating,Underwriting,BankertoanIssue,
DebentureTrusteesandPortfoliomanagers,ChallengesfacedbyInvestmentBankers.MerchantBanking:
Definition,ServicesofMerchantBanks.
EssentialReadings:
●L.M.Bhole:FinancialInstitutionsandMarkets,TMH,2009.
●E.Gordon,K.Natarajan:FinancialMarketsandServices,HimalayaPublishingHouse,2013.
●VasantDesai:FinancialMarketsandFinancialServices,Himalaya,2009
●Pathak:IndianFinancialSystems,Pearson,2009
●M.Y.Khan:FinancialServices,TMH,2009.
LTP/DC
3003

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
77
References:
●S.Gurusamy:FinancialServicesandSystem,Cengage,2009
●JustinPaulandPadmalathaSuresh:ManagementofBankingandFinancialServices,Pearson,2009.
●Gomez,FinancialMarkets,InstitutionsandFinancialServices,PHI,2012.
●RMSrivatsava:DynamicsofFinancialMarketsandInstitutionsinIndia,Excel,2013.

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
78
SyllabusforB.TechIVYearIsemester
ElectronicsandComputerEngineering
ADVANCEDENTREPRENEURSHIP
(OpenElective-II)
Code:9ZC23
CourseObjective:Thecourseisdesignedtoimpartthenecessarymanagerialskillsandtacticsrequiredforan
emergingEntrepreneurfortheEngineeringstudentstoenhancetheirprospectsasanEntrepreneur.
CourseOutcomes:
Explainsthestudentstogainknowledgeontheneedofrevisitngbusinessmodelandalsolearningabout
typesofbusinessmodels.(L2).
Discoversthevarioustypesofbusinessplanningthatareneededtoimplementthebusinessmodel(L4)
Identifyvariousfundingoptionsforanentrepreneurandalsotheteammembersinvolvedinit(L3)
Explainsthedigitalplatformsandtoolsavailableformarketingandalsoforonlinestorageofdocuments
(L2).
Evaluatethegrowthofthestratupsusingperformanceandfinancialmetrics(L5)
UNITI:FundamentalsofEntrepreneurship&RefiningBusinessModelandProduct:
Fundamentalsandkeyconceptsofentrepreneurship,refiningthebusinessmodel,productsandservices,
pivoting,typesofbusinessmodels,businessmodelevolution,generatingnewbusinessmodels,analyzing
thebusinessmodel,addingnewcustomersegment,productmanager,significanceandroleofproduct
manager.
UNITII:BusinessPlanning&ExploringRevenue:
Businessplan,salesplan,hiringsaleteam,peopleplan,financialplanning,financialforecasting,createa
procurementplan,negotiatingroleplay,understandingprimaryrevenuesources,exploringcustomer
lifecycleforgrowthcustomers,exploringandidentifysecondarysourcesofrevenue.
UNITIII:FundingtheGrowth&BuildingtheA-Team:
Overviewoffunding,fundingoptionsforanentrepreneur,exploretherightfundingoptions,createfunding
plan,pitchdeck,introductiontobuildingA-Team,pitchingtoattractthetalent,settingyourteam,defining
roles,hiringtheA-Teammembers.
UNITIV:BrandandChannelStrategy&LeveragingTechnologies:
Introductiontobranding,drawntheventure’sgoldencircle,positioningandpositioningstatements,
creatingbrandname,logo,socialmediahandle,Identifyrightchannels,leapingaheadwithtechnology,
digitalmarketingforstartups,planasocialmediacampaign,digitalcollaboration,storedocumentsonline,
othertechnologyplatforms,maketechplan,platformwishlist.
UNITV:MeasuringProgressandLegalMatters:
Metricsforcustomeracquisition(CAC,CLV,andARPU),metricsforcustomerretentionandsatisfaction,
findCAC,CLVandARPU,keyfinancialmetrics,communicatemetrics,newrevenuestreamthroughkey
financialmetrics,re-forecastingoffinancialplan,identifyprofessionalhelpforlegalandcompliance
requirements,searchingoftrademarkandbrandnameandcompanyname.
UNITVI:SeekingSupportandFinalProject:
Mentorshelptocreatesuccessfulstartups,identifymentorsandadvisors,importanceofmentorsand
advisors,scouttheboardofdirectors,overviewonfinalproject,capstoneprojectpresentation,contentsof
capstoneproject.
LTP/DC
3003

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
79
EssentialReadings:
●EntrepreneurshipRajeevRoy“”oxford,2012
●EntrepreneurshipDevelopmentKhanka,,S.Chand2012
References:
●SmallScaleindustriesandEntrepreneurshipVasanthDesai“Himalyapublishing2012
●RobertHisrichetal“enterprenerushipTMH2012
●EntrepreneurshipDevelopmentKhanka,,S.Chand2012
●EntrepreneurshipDevelopmentB.JanikairamandMRizwana
●e-source:-www.learnwise.org
SocialScienceStream

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
80
SyllabusforB.TechIVYearIsemester
ElectronicsandComputerEngineering
CO-CREATIONANDPRODUCTDESIGN
(OpenElective-II)
Code:9ZC09
CourseObjective:Theobjectiveofthecourseistomakestudentsunderstandthefundamentalconceptsofdesign
thinking,andtofamiliarizewithproductdesignprocessandtomotivatethestudentstoideatenewproductsand
services.
CourseOutcomes:
CO1:OutlinethesignificanceofHumanCenteredDesignfromcustomerperspective.(L2)
CO2:Examinethescopeofemergingtechnologiesinthefieldofproductdesign.(L4)
CO3:Designingtheproductprototypesanddevelopingthetestingsolutions.(L6)
CO4:Determinetherelevanceofreverseengineeringandergonomicsatworkplace.(L5)
CO5:ApplicationoftheknowledgeintopracticewithregardtoIPR’s.(L3)
Unit–I:HUMANCENTEREDDESIGN:UnderstandinguserandCustomerperspectives,Identify
insightsandopportunities,Interviewing,UserExperiencedesign.Frameyourdesignchallenge.Empathy
toolsandtechniques.
UNITII:IDEATIONPROCESS:ArticulationofProblemStatement,VisualizingIdeas,Communicating
ideasandcompellingstorytelling,Brainstorming,Divergentthinkinginexploringsolutions,3-box
thinking,3-boxframeworkandBox-3ideation.
UNITIII:EMERGINGTECHNOLOGIESANDDESIGN:Emergingtechnologies,utilizationand
growth,AutomationthroughIndustry4.0,IOTforNetworkandIntelligentworld,efficientandeffective
manufacturingaidedbyRobotics,CustommanufacturingbyAdditive/3Dprinting,Augmentedrealityfor
productandprocess.
UNITIV:PROTOTYPING:IntroductiontoPrototype,typesofprototype,prototypingstrategies,Design
considerationinthefivestagesoftheproductlifecycle.Prototypebuildingbydifferentengineering
disciplines.TestingSolutionandtakingthesolutiontotheusers.Createapitchforyourdesign.
UNITV:REVERSEENGINEERINGINPRODUCTDEVELOPMENT:Reversingengineering
methods,identifyingthebadfeaturesinaproduct,reductioninsizeandweight,usageofnewmaterials,
importanceofergonomicsinproductdevelopment,environmentalconsiderationsindesign,andsafety
considerationsindesign.
UNITVI:INTELLECTUALPROPERTYRIGHTS:IntroductiontoIPR,Patents–TypesofPatents,
elementsofpatentability,PatentsregistrationProcedure,PatentofficeandAppellateBoard,Rightsand
DutiesofPatentee,RestorationofLapsedpatents.
EssentialReadings:
1.PhilipKosky,RobertT.Balmer,WilliamD.Keat,GeorgeWise,“ExploringEngineering:An
IntroductiontoEngineeringandDesign”,4thedition,Elsevier,2016.
2.DavidRalzman,“HistoryofModernDesign”,2ndedition,LaurenceKingPublishingLtd.,20103.
AnAVABook,“DesignThinking”,AVAPublishing,2010.
3.Ingle,B.R.(2013).Designthinkingforentrepreneursandsmallbusinesses:Puttingthepowerof
designtowork.Apress.
4.Norman,D.A.(2016).Livingwithcomplexity.MITpress.
LTP/DC
3003

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
81
5.Chapman,J.(2017).Routledgehandbookofsustainableproductdesign.Taylor&Francis.
6.Nithyananda,K.V.(2019),IPR,protectionandManagement,India,CengagelearningIndia.
References:
1.G.Pahl,W.Beitz,J.Feldhusen,KHGrote,“EngineeringDesign:ASystematicApproach”,3rd
edition,Springer,2007.2.TomKelley,JonathanLittman,“TenFacesinInnovation”,Currency
Books,2006.
2.Kumar,V.(2012).101designmethods:Astructuredapproachfordrivinginnovationinyour
organization.JohnWiley&Sons.
3.Chapman,J.(2012).DesignersVisionariesandOtherStories:ACollectionofSustainableDesign
Essays.Taylor&Francis.
4.Garrett,J.J.(2010).Theelementsofuserexperience:user-centereddesignforthewebandbeyond.
PearsonEducation.
5.Neeraj,P.&Khusdeep,D(2014),IPR,India,IN:PHILearning.

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
82
SyllabusforB.TechIVYearIsemester
ElectronicsandComputerEngineering
FUNDAMENTALSOFRENEWABLEENERGYSOURCES
(OpenElective-II)
Code:9AC45
CourseObjectives:
Becomesfamiliarwithsolarenergy,itsradiation,Collection,storageandapplicationandalsogetsintroducedto
otherformsofRenewableEnergysourcesviz.,theWindenergy,Biomassenergy,geothermalenergyandocean
energy.
CourseOutcomes:
Thestudentshouldbeableto
1.Understandtheroleandpotentialofnewandrenewableenergysourcesrealizethepotentialofsolarenergy,
itsimpactonenvironment.
2.Demonstratestheknowledgeofdifferenttechniquesofsolarcollectionandstorage.
3.Thestudentbecomesfamiliarwiththedifferenttypesofhorizontalandverticalaxiswindmillsand
understandstheperformancecharacteristicsofthesame.
4.AwareofthepotentialofgeothermalenergyinIndiaandwillbeabletocharacterizedifferenttypesof
geothermalwells.
5.AwareofthedifferentmethodsofkineticenergyextractionfromOceanwavesandtidesandthermalenergy
extractionfromOceans.
6.DemonstratestheknowledgeofDirectEnergyConversionindifferentphenomenaviz.,JouleThomsoneffect,
Seebeckeffect,Peltiereffectetc.andtheprincipleofoperationofFuelCells.
UNIT–I-PRINCIPLESOFSOLARRADIATION:
Roleandpotentialofnewandrenewablesource,Thesolarenergyoption,Environmentalimpactofsolar
power,Physicsofthesun,thesolarconstant,Extraterrestrialandterrestrialsolarradiation,Solarradiation
ontitledsurface,Instrumentsformeasuringsolarradiationandsunshine,Solarradiationdata.
UNIT-II-SOLARENERGYCOLLECTIONSTORAGEANDAPPLICATIONS:Flatplateand
concentratingcollectors,Classificationofconcentratingcollectors,orientationandthermalanalysis,
advancedcollectors.
Differentmethods,Sensible,Latentheatandstratifiedstorage,solarponds.SolarApplications-solar
heating/coolingtechnique,solardistillationanddrying,photovoltaicenergyconversion.
UNIT–IIIWINDENERGY:
Sourcesandpotentials,Horizontalandverticalaxiswindmills,Performancecharacteristics,Betzcriteria
BIO-MASS:PrinciplesofBio-Conversion,Anaerobic/aerobicdigestion,TypesofBio-gasdigesters,Gas
yield,Combustioncharacteristicsofbio-gas,Utilizationforcooking,I.C.Engineoperationandeconomic
aspects.
UNIT–IVGEOTHERMALENERGY:
Resources,typesofwells,methodsofharnessingtheenergy,PotentialinIndia.
UNIT-VOCEANENERGY:
OTEC,Principlesutilization,SettingofOTECplants,Thermodynamiccycles.Tidalandwaveenergy,
Potentialandconversiontechniques,Mini-hydelpowerplantsandtheireconomics.
UNIT-VIDIRECTENERGYCONVERSION:
NeedforDEC,Carnotcycle,Limitations,principlesofDEC.Thermoelectricgenerators,seebeck,Peltier
andjoulThomsoneffects,Figureofmerit,materials,Applications,MHDgenerators,Principles,
Dissociationandionization,Halleffect,Magneticflux,MHDaccelerator,MHDEngine,Powergeneration
LTP/DC
3003

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
83
systems,Electrongasdynamicconversion,economicaspects.Fuelcells–principles-Faraday’slaw’s-
Thermodynamicaspects-selectionoffuelsandoperatingconditions.
TEXTBOOKS:
1.Non-ConventionalEnergySources-G.D.Rai
2.RenewableEnergyTechnologies-Ramesh&Kumar/Narosa.
REFERENCEBOOKS:
1.Renewableenergyresources-TiwariandGhosal/Narosa.
2.Non-ConventionalEnergy-AshokVDesai/WileyEastern.
3.Non-ConventionalEnergySystems-KMittal/Wheeler.

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
84
SyllabusforB.TechIVYearIsemester
ElectronicsandComputerEngineering
PRINCIPLESOFOPERATIONSRESEARCH
(OpenElective-II)
Code:9BC52
CourseObjectives:
Thecourseaimsatbuildingcapabilitiesinthestudentsforanalyzingdifferentsituationsintheindustrial/business
scenarioinvolvinglimitedresourcesandfindingtheoptimalsolutionwithinconstraints.
CourseOutcomes:
CO1:Formulateandsolvemathematicalmodel(linearprogrammingproblem)foraphysicalsituationslike
production,distributionofgoodsandeconomics.
CO2:RecognizeandSolvetheproblemoftransportationinvolvingalargenumberofshippingrouteswithleast
transportationcostandgenerateoptimalassignmentstrategyfordifferentsituations
CO4:UseJohnson’sruletocreatetheoptimalsequencingscheduleforasequencingproblemandmakedecisions
aboutreplacinganitemusingreplacementpolicy
CO5:AnalyzetheperformancemeasuresofQueingsystemandCalculatetheEOQforminimizingthetotalinventory
cost
CO6:ApplysimulationtechniquesforsolvingvarioustypesofproblemsandgeneralideadevelopmentaboutMarkov
chains
UNIT–I
INTRODUCTION:Definition,CharacteristicsandPhasesandTypesofmodels,applications.
LINEARPROGRAMMINGPROBLEM-Formulation–Graphicalsolution,Simplexmethod-Typesof
variables,UniqueandMultipleoptimalsolution,Redundancy&DegeneracyinLPP,Unboundedsolution,
Artificialvariablestechniques-Big-Mmethodwithfeasibleandinfeasiblesolutions,Two–phasemethod,
PrimaltoDualformationwithDualityPrinciple.
UNIT–II
TRANSPORTATIONPROBLEM–Formulation–methodsoffindinginitialsolution(NWcorner,VAM,
LeastcostMethod)Optimalsolution(SteppingstoneMethod,MODImethod)SpecialcasesinTP:
unbalanced,Degeneracy,Restrictionandmaximizationcase.
ASSIGNMENTPROBLEM–Formulation–Optimalsolution(HungarianMethod)-Variantsof
AssignmentProblem-Unbalanced,Restriction,Maximization,Airlineslayovercase,TravelingSalesman
problem.
UNIT–III
SEQUENCING–Introduction–Terminology,Assumptions,Johnson’sprocedure-Processingnjobs
throughtwomachines–Processingnjobsthroughthreemachines–Processingtwojobsthrough‘m’
machines(GanttChart).
REPLACEMENT:Introduction–Typesoffailure,Replacementofitemsthatdeterioratewithtime–
whenmoneyvalueisnotcountedandcounted–Replacementofitemsthatfailcompletely,Group
replacement.
LTP/DC
3003

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
85
UNIT–IV
THEORYOFGAMES:IntroductionandTerminologies,Criterionandoptimalstrategy–Solutionof
gameswithsaddlepoints:MixedStrategies-Rectangulargameswithoutsaddlepoints,Dominanceprinciple,
AverageRelationalDominance,mX2&2Xngames-GraphicalmethodandSubGameMethod,Matrix
Method,ApplicationofLPPingametheory.
UNIT–V
WAITINGLINES:Introduction,Terminology,Structureofaqueue,callingpopulation
characteristics-size,behavior,patternofarrivals,Kendall-Leenotation,QueuingModels:SingleChannel:
Poissonarrivals:exponentialservicetimes:withfiniteandinfinitepopulation,Multichannel:Poisson
arrivals:exponentialservicetimeswithinfinitepopulation
INVENTORY:Introduction,Inventorycosts,ConceptofEOQ,SingleitemDeterministicmodelswith
andwithoutshortages,Singleiteminventorymodelswithonepricebreakandmultiplepricebreaks,
Stochasticmodels–Instantaneousdemandandnosetupcost.
UNIT–VI
SIMULATION:Definition–Typesofsimulation–phasesofsimulation–applicationsofsimulation–
InventoryandQueuingproblems–AdvantagesandDisadvantages
Markovchains:IntroductiontoMarkovchains,AnalysisAssumptions,Inputoutputprobabilities,
Applications(Onlybasicunderstanding)
TEXTBOOKS:
1.Operationsresearch/Hira&Gupta
2.OperationResearch/J.K.Sharma/MacmillanPublishers.
REFERENCES:
1.QuantitativeTechniquesinManagement:NDVohra,TMH

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
86
SyllabusforB.TechIVYearIsemester
ElectronicsandComputerEngineering
BIGDATAANALYTICS
(ProfessionalElective-III)
Code:9FC15
Prerequisites:MachineLearning
CourseObjectives:
1.Toexplorethefundamentalconceptsofbigdataanalytics.
2.TounderstandstorageandparallelprocessingofBigDatausingHadoop
3.TointroduceprogrammingtoolslikeHIVE,SQOOP,HBASEinHadoopecosystem.
4.TounderstandtheapplicationsusingApacheSparkRDDConcepts.
5.ToknowhighlevelAPIlikeDataFramesandSparkSQL
6.Toteachthefundamentaltechniquesandprinciplesinachievingbigdataanalyticswithstream
processing.
CourseOutcomes:
Attheendofthiscourse,thestudentwillbeableto
1.
ComprehendthefundamentalsofbigdataanalyticsandunderstandhowHadoopsolvesthebigdataproblem
inreallife.
2.
Interpretthechallengeswithbigdataandelaboratetheknowledgeaboutthetechnologicaldevelopmentsin
bigdataenvironmentanddifferencebetweenNOSQLandSQLdatabases.
3.
DiscusstheHadoopdistributedfilesystem(HDFS)frameworkandanatomyofHadoopmap-reduce.
4.
DesignthealgorithmstoprocessbigdatausingApacheSparkLowLevelAPI.
5.
ApplyHadoopDataAnalysistosocialMediaAnalyticsandOpinionMiningonTweets.
UNIT–I:
IntroductiontoBigData:BigDataAnalytics,CharacteristicsofBigData–TheFourVs,importanceof
BigData,DifferentUsecases,Data-Structured,Semi-Structured,Un-Structured
IntroductiontoHadoopanditsuseinsolvingbigdataproblems.ComparisonHadoopwithRDBMS,Brief
historyofHadoop,ApacheHadoopEcoSystem,ComponentsofHadoop,TheHadoopDistributedFile
System(HDFS):,ArchitectureanddesignofHDFSindetail,WorkingwithHDFS(Commands)
UNIT-II
AnatomyofHadoopmap-reduce(InputSplits,mapphase,shuffle,sort,combiner,reducephase)
(theory)Hive:IntroductiontoHive,datatypesandfileformats,HiveQLdatadefinition(Creating
DatabasesandTables),HiveQLforDataloading,HiveQLdatamanipulation,Logicaljoins,Window
functions,Optimization,Tablepartitioning,Bucketing,Indexing,JoinStrategies.
UNIT-III
SQOOP:IntroductiontoSQOOP,SQOOPimports:FromDatabasetoHDFS/Hive,SQOOPexports:From
HDFS/HivetoDatabase,Incrementalimports
NoSQL&HBase:Overview,HBasearchitecture,CRUDoperations
UNIT-IV
SPARKBasics:HistoryofSpark,SparkArchitecture,SparkShell,workingwithRDDsinSpark:RDD
Basics,CreatingRDDsinSpark.RDDOperations.PassingFunctionstoSpark,Transformationsand
ActionsinSpark,SparkRDDPersistence
WorkingwithKey/ValuePairs:PairRDDs,TransformationsonPairRDDs,ActionsAvailableonPair
RDDs
LTP/DC
3003

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
87
UNIT-V
StructuredAPI:DataFrames,SQL:OverviewofStructuredSparkTypes,Schemas,Columnsand
Expressions,DataFrameTransformations,Workingwithdifferenttypesofdata,Aggregations-
AggregationFunctions,Grouping,User-DefinedAggregationFunctions,,Joins-InnerJoins,OuterJoins,
ProcessingCSVFiles,JSONFiles,TextFilesandParquetFiles,SparkSQL
UNIT-VI
Sparkstreaming:StreamProcessingFundamentals,StructuredStreamingBasics-CoreConcepts,
StructuredStreaminginAction,TransformationsonStreams,InputandOutput(Kafka)
Casestudy:TwitterStreamprocessingapplication
TEXTBOOKS:
1.TomWhite,"Hadoop:TheDefinitiveGuide",ThirdEdition,O'Reilley,2012
2.SPARK:TheDefinitiveGuide,BillChambers&MateiZaharia,O'Reilley,2018Edition
REFERENCES:
1."HadoopOperations",O'Reilley,EricSammer,2012
2."ProgrammingHive",O'Reilley,E.Capriolo,D.Wampler,andJ.Rutherglen,2012
3."HBase:TheDefinitiveGuide",O'Reilley,LarsGeorge,2011
4.BigData,BigAnalytics:Emerging,MichaelMinnelli,MichelleChambers,and
AmbigaDhiraj

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
88
SyllabusforB.TechIVYearIsemester
ElectronicsandComputerEngineering
INTRODUCTIONTOINTERNETOFTHINGS
(ProfessionalElective-III)
Code:9IC45
Prerequisite:DataCommunicationsandNetworks
CourseOutcomes:
Attheendofthiscourse,thestudentswillbeableto
•
Gettingfamiliarwithterminology,technologyandapplicationsofIOT
•
UnderstandandexplainIoTsystemmanagementusingM2M(machinetomachine)withnecessaryprotocols
•
DesignanddevelopPythonScriptingLanguageprogramspreferredformanyIoTapplications
•
UseRaspberryPIasahardwareplatformfordesigningtheIoTsensorinterfacing
•
ImplementwebbasedservicesforIoT
•
UnderstandandanalyzethecasestudiesillustratingIoTDesign
UNITI:IntroductiontoInternetofThingsDefinitionandCharacteristicsofIoT,PhysicalDesignofIoT–
IoTProtocols,IoTcommunicationmodels,IoTCommunicationAPIs,IoTenabledTechnologieslike
WirelessSensorNetworks,CloudComputing,Bigdataanalytics,andCommunicationprotocols,
EmbeddedSystems,IoTLevelsandTemplates.
UNITII:IoTandM2MSoftwaredefinednetworks,networkfunctionvirtualization,differencebetween
SDNandNFVforIoT;BasicsofIoTSystemManagementwithNETCOZF-YANG(BlockDiagrams).
UNITIII:DevelopingIoT,IoTDesignMethodology–The10stepsdesignmethodology;Logicaldesign
usingPython:IntroductiontoPython-LanguagefeaturesofPython,Datatypes,datastructures,Controlof
flow,functions,modules,packaging,filehandling,date/timeoperations,Pythonpackagesofinterestfor
IoT.
UNITIV:IoTPhysicalDevicesandEndpointsRaspberryPI–IntroductiontoRaspberryPIandits
Interfaces(serial,SPI,I2C)Programming–PythonprogrammingwithRaspberryPI–ControllingInput/
output(InterfacingwithLEDandLDR).
UNITV:IoTPhysicalServersandCloudOfferingsCloudconcepts(IaaS,PaaS,Saas),Introductionto
CloudStoragemodelsandcommunicationAPIs–WAMP,Xively;Pythonwebapplicationframeworkwith
Django,DesigningaRESTfulwebAPI
UNITVI:CaseStudiesIllustratingIoTDesignHomeAutomation–SmartLighting,Homeintrusion
detection,Cities–Smartparking,Environment–Weathermonitoringsystem,Weatherreportingbot,Air
pollutionmonitoring,Forestfiredetection,Agriculture–Smartirrigation,Productivityapplications–IoT
printer.
TEXTBOOKS:
•InternetofThings-AHands-onApproach,ArshdeepBahgaandVijayMadisetti,UniversitiesPress,
2015,ISBN:9788173719547
•GettingStartedwithRaspberryPi,MattRichardson&ShawnWallace,O'Reilly(SPD),2014,
ISBN:9789350239759
LTP/DC
3003

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
89
SyllabusforB.TechIVYearIsemester
ElectronicsandComputerEngineering
SOFTCOMPUTING
(ProfessionalElective-III)
Code:9EC18
CourseObjectives:
1.Familiarizewithsoftcomputingconcepts
2.Introduceandusetheideaoffuzzylogicanduseofheuristicsbasedonhumanexperience
3.FamiliarizetheNeuro-FuzzymodelingusingClassificationandClusteringtechniques
4.LearntheconceptsofGeneticalgorithmanditsapplications
5.AcquiretheknowledgeofRoughSets.
CourseOutcomes:Oncompletionofthiscourse,thestudentswillbeableto:
1.IdentifythedifferencebetweenConventionalArtificialIntelligencetoComputationalIntelligence.
2.Understandfuzzylogicandreasoningtohandleandsolveengineeringproblems
3.ApplytheClassificationandclusteringtechniquesonvariousapplications.
4.Understandtheadvancedneuralnetworksanditsapplications
5.Performvariousoperationsofgeneticalgorithms,RoughSets.
6.Comprehendvarioustechniquestobuildmodelforvariousapplications
UNIT–I:IntroductiontoSoftComputing:EvolutionaryComputing,"Soft"computingversus"Hard"
computing,SoftComputingMethods,RecentTrendsinSoftComputing,CharacteristicsofSoftcomputing,
ApplicationsofSoftComputingTechniques.
UNIT-II:FuzzySystems:FuzzySets,FuzzyRelations,FuzzyLogic,FuzzyRule-BasedSystems
UNIT-III:FuzzyDecisionMaking,ParticleSwarmOptimization
UNIT-IV:GeneticAlgorithms:BasicConcepts,BasicOperatorsforGeneticAlgorithms,Crossoverand
MutationProperties.
UNIT-V:GeneticAlgorithmCycle,FitnessFunction,ApplicationsofGeneticAlgorithm.
UNIT-VI:RoughSets,RoughSets,RuleInduction,andDiscernibilityMatrix,IntegrationofSoft
ComputingTechniques.
TEXTBOOK:
1.SoftComputing–AdvancesandApplications-Jan2015byB.K.TripathyandJ.Anuradha–Cengage
Learning
REFERENCEBOOKS:
1.S.N.Sivanandam&S.N.Deepa,“PrinciplesofSoftComputing”,2ndedition,WileyIndia,2008.
2.DavidE.Goldberg,“GeneticAlgorithms-InSearch,optimizationandMachinelearning”,Pearson
Education.
3.J.S.R.Jang,C.T.SunandE.Mizutani,“Neuro-FuzzyandSoftComputing”,PearsonEducation,2004.
4.G.J.Klir&B.Yuan,“FuzzySets&FuzzyLogic”,PHI,1995.
5.MelanieMitchell,“AnIntroductiontoGeneticAlgorithm”,PHI,1998.
6.TimothyJ.Ross,“FuzzyLogicwithEngineeringApplications”,McGraw-HillInternational
editions,1995
LTP/DC
3003

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
90
SyllabusforB.TechIVYearIsemester
ElectronicsandComputerEngineering
DESIGNVERIFICATIONUSINGSYSTEMVERILOG
(ProfessionalElective-III)
Code:9C726
CourseDescription:
Thiscoursegivesastudentanin-depthintroductiontothemainSystemVerilogenhancementstotheVeriloghardware
descriptionlanguage(HDL),discussesthebenefitsofthenewfeatures,anddemonstrateshowdesignandverification
canbemoreefficientandeffectivewhenusingSystemVerilogconstructs.
Thecourseisbrokendownintotwomodules:TheDesignmoduleexaminesimprovementsforRTLdesignand
synthesis;theVerificationmoduleexploresverificationenhancementssuchasobject-orienteddesign,assertionsand
randomization.
Prerequisites:
AworkingknowledgeofVerilogHDL
Theabilitytonavigateafilesystemanduseatexteditor
Abasicunderstandingofdigitalhardwaredesignandverification
CourseOutcomes
CO1UnderstandtheUVMconcepts
CO2Exploretheclassinstancesandfunctions
CO3ComprehendtheUVMConfigurations
CO4AnalyzingUVMsequencesandModelinginUVM
CO5DevelopingReusableTestbenchesusingUVMandAnalyzingtheCasestudiesofLayeredtestbenchfor
SPI,APBandAXI.
SyllabusContents:
Unit-1:IntroductiontoFunctionalVerification:WhatisVerification?,Whatdoweverify?,
VerificationAbstractions,Behaviorallevel,Transactionlevel,Functional/RTLlevel,Gatelevel,
Transactionlevel;Importanceof(Functional)VerificationinChipdesignlifecycle,Verificationgoals;
OverviewofvariousFunctionalVerificationtechniques:Simulations,FPGAPrototyping,Emulation,
HW/SWCo-verification,FormalVerification,SemiformalVerification,ModelsofFunctionalVerification.
Blackbox,Whitebox,Graybox,VerificationHierarchy:Chip-level,Cluster/Subsystemlevel,IPlevel,
Module/Unitlevel.
Unit-2:OverviewofSoCArchitecturesandFunctionalVerificationEnvironment:WhatisanSoC?,
AdvantagesofSoCsoverconventionalASICs?,TypicalcomponentsofanSoCs,SampleSoC
Architectures,TypicalSoCbasedTestbenchenvironment,StimuliGenerators,Hardcoded,DirectStimuli
fromtheenvironment,Stimulifromthemodeloftheenvironment(BFMs),RandomStimuliGeneration;
Predictors:Golden/ReferenceModel,MoreAbstract(Functional,TransactionLevel),Hardwiredresponse,
Responsedatabase;Transactors,Monitors,Scoreboards,CoverageCollectors-Coverpoints,Property
Checkers-Assertions.
LTP/DC
3003

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
91
Unit-3:SystemVerilogLanguageConcepts:EvolutionofSystemVerilog:DifferencesbetweenVerilogand
SystemVerilogHDL,NewfeaturesaddedinSystemVerilog(NewDatatypeadditions,Arrays-Fixed,
Packed,Dynamic,Queues,Associated,Structures&Unions,NewOperators,NewadditionstoSubroutines,
NewadditionstoProceduralstatements&Controlflow,Concurrency:Fork.join,Fork..join_any,
Fork..join_none,AutomaticVariables,Interfaces,Programblock);
Unit-4:ObjectOrientedProgrammingConcepts-I:Classes:Encapsulatingproperties&methods,Object
memorycreation,WorkingwithObjecthandles,Objectcopying:ShallowandDeepcopy,Objectcloning,
Objectprotection,ObjectvariablesVsClassvariables:Statickeyword,ObjectRandomization,
RandomizationSeed-Adeeplook,Randomizationvariables,ConstraintBlock,WeightedRandomization,
ControllingRandomization,Solveorder,InlineConstraints-withconstraints,ObjectInheritance,
LimitationsofInheritance,PolymorphismandMethodsoverriding,
Unit-5:ObjectOrientedProgrammingConcepts-II:VirtualInterfaces,InterthreadSynchronization&
Communication:Events,Semaphores,Mailboxes,Packages,Assertions,Immediateassertions,Procedural
assertions,Temporaloperators,Booleanoperators,Sequences,Properties,FunctionalCoverage:Cover
points&Bins,Covergroups,Crosscoverage,Samplingcoverpoints,Calculatingfunctionalcoverage,
InterfacingwithC-DPI,CompilerDirectives.
Unit-6:AdvancedTestbenchDesignusingSystemVerilog:IntroductiontoLayeredtestbench,architecture,
Driver,Monitor,Transactor,Generator,Configurations-Device,Transaction,Scoreboard,Reference
models,Busfunctionmodels.
Textbooks:
1.SystemVerilogForVerification:AGuidetoLearningtheTestbenchLanguageFeaturesbyChrisSpear&
GregTumbush(3rdEdition/5thEdition).
2.APracticalGuideForSystemVerilogAssertionsbySrikanthVijayaraghavan&Meyyappan
Ramanathan.
ReferenceBooks:
1.APracticalGuideForSystemVerilogAssertionsbySrikanthVijayaraghavan&Meyyappan
Ramanathan.
2.LogicDesignandverificationusingSystemVerilogbyDonaldThomas

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
92
SyllabusforB.TechIVYearIsemester
ElectronicsandComputerEngineering
EMBEDDEDSYSTEMDESIGNUSINGARM
(ProfessionalElective-III)
Code:9C727
Oncompletionofthiscourseyoushouldbeableto:
1.UnderstandthebasicarchitectureofEmbeddedSystemandtheirclassification.
2.ExplorethearchitectureofARMprocessor.
3.UnderstandtheaddressingmodesanddataprocessinginstructionsofARMprocessor.
4.UnderstandtheARMthumbinstructionsetanditscapabilities.
5.UsebothassemblyandClanguagebasedARMprogrammingandExplorethememorymanagement
techniquesinARM.
UNIT-I:
Introductiontoembeddedsystem:Embeddedsystemarchitecture,classificationsofembeddedsystems,
challengesanddesignissuesinembeddedsystems,fundamentalsofembeddedprocessorand
microcontrollers,CISCvs.RISC,fundamentalsofVonNeuman/Harvardarchitectures,typesof
microcontrollers,selectionofmicrocontrollers.
UNIT–II:
ARMArchitecture:ARMDesignPhilosophy,Registers,ProgramStatusRegister,InstructionPipeline,
InterruptsandVectorTable,ArchitectureRevision,ARMProcessorFamilies.
UNIT–III:
ARMProgrammingModel–I:InstructionSet:DataProcessingInstructions,AddressingModes,Branch,
Load,StoreInstructions,PSRInstructions,ConditionalInstructions.
UNIT–IV:
ARMProgrammingModel–II:ThumbInstructionSet:RegisterUsage,OtherBranchInstructions,Data
ProcessingInstructions,Single-RegisterandMultiRegisterLoad-StoreInstructions,Stack,Software
InterruptInstructions
UNIT–V:
ARMProgramming:SimpleCProgramsusingFunctionCalls,Pointers,Structures,IntegerandFloating
PointArithmetic,AssemblyCodeusingInstructionScheduling,RegisterAllocation,ConditionalExecution
andLoops.
UNIT–VI:
MemoryManagement:CacheArchitecture,Polices,FlushingandCaches,MMU,PageTables,
Translation,AccessPermissions,ContextSwitch.
TEXTBOOKS:
1.ARMSystemsDeveloper’sGuides-Designing&OptimizingSystemSoftware–AndrewN.Sloss,
DominicSymes,ChrisWright,2008,Elsevier.
REFERENCEBOOKS:
EmbeddedMicrocomputerSystems,RealTimeInterfacing–JonathanW.Valvano–Brookes/Cole,1999,
ThomasLearning.
LTP/DC
3003

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
93
SyllabusforB.TechIVYearIsemester
ElectronicsandComputerEngineering
DEVOPS
(ProfessionalElective-IV)
Code:9LC17
CourseObjectives:
1.DescribetheagilerelationshipbetweendevelopmentandIToperations.
2.Understandtheskillsetsandhigh-functioningteamsinvolvedinDevOpsandrelatedmethodstoreacha
continuousdeliverycapability.
3.ImplementautomatedsystemupdateandDevOpslifecycle.
CourseOutcomes:
Onsuccessfulcompletionofthiscourse,studentswillbeableto:
1.IdentifycomponentsofDevopsenvironment.
2.DescribeSoftwaredevelopmentmodelsandarchitecturesofDevOps.
3.Applydifferentprojectmanagement,integration,testingandcodedeploymenttool.
4.InvestigatedifferentDevOpsSoftwaredevelopmentmodels.
5.AssessvariousDevopspractices.
6.CollaborateandadoptDevopsinreal-timeprojects.
UNIT–I
Introduction:Introduction,Agiledevelopmentmodel,DevOps,andITIL.DevOpsprocessandContinuous
Delivery,Releasemanagement,Scrum,Kanban,deliverypipeline,bottlenecks,examples
UNIT–II
SoftwaredevelopmentmodelsandDevOps:DevOpsLifecycleforBusinessAgility,DevOps,and
ContinuousTesting.
DevOpsinfluenceonArchitecture:Introducingsoftwarearchitecture,Themonolithicscenario,
Architecturerulesofthumb,Theseparationofconcerns,Handlingdatabasemigrations,Microservices,and
thedatatier,DevOps,architecture,andresilience.
UNIT–III
Introductiontoprojectmanagement:Theneedforsourcecodecontrol,Thehistoryofsourcecode
management,Rolesandcode,sourcecodemanagementsystemandmigrations,Sharedauthentication,
HostedGitservers,DifferentGitserverimplementations,Dockerintermission,Gerrit,Thepullrequest
model,GitLab.
UNIT–IV
Integratingthesystem:Buildsystems,Jenkinsbuildserver,Managingbuilddependencies,Jenkinsplugins,
andfilesystemlayout,Thehostserver,Buildslaves,Softwareonthehost,Triggers,Jobchainingandbuild
pipelines,Buildserversandinfrastructureascode,Buildingbydependencyorder,Buildphases,Alternative
buildservers,Collatingqualitymeasures.
UNIT–V
TestingToolsandautomation:Varioustypesoftesting,AutomationoftestingProsandcons,Selenium-
Introduction,Seleniumfeatures,JavaScripttesting,Testingbackendintegrationpoints,Test-driven
development,REPL-drivendevelopment
UNIT–VI
Deploymentofthesystem:Deploymentsystems,Virtualizationstacks,codeexecutionattheclient,Puppet
masterandagents,Ansible,Deploymenttools:Chef,SaltStackandDocker.
LTP/DC
3003

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
94
TEXTBOOKS:
1.JoakimVerona.PracticalDevops,SecondEdition.Ingramshorttitle;2ndedition(2018).ISBN-10:
1788392574.
2.DeepakGaikwad,ViralThakkar.DevOpsToolsfromPractitioner'sViewpoint.Wileypublications.
ISBN:9788126579952.
REFERENCES:
1.LenBass,IngoWeber,LimingZhu.DevOps:ASoftwareArchitect'sPerspective.AddisonWesley;
ISBN-10.

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
95
SyllabusforB.TechIVYearIsemester
ElectronicsandComputerEngineering
BLOCKCHAINTECHNOLOGIES
(ProfessionalElective-IV)
Code:9JC05
Prerequisite:InformationSecurity
CourseObjectives:
Tounderstandhowblockchainsystems(mainlyBitcoinandEthereum)work.Tosecurelyinteractwiththem,design,
build,anddeploysmartcontractsanddistributedapplications.Integrateideasfromblockchaintechnologyintotheir
ownprojects.
CourseOutcomes:
Attheendofthiscoursethestudentwillbeableto
1.SummarizetheconceptualworkingofblockchainusingCryptographicprinciples.
2.ExplorethePaymentVerificationprotocol,itslifecycleandthedifferentconsensusalgorithms.
3.Classifythedifferenttypesofcryptocurrencyalongsidetheirfeatures.
4.Outlinethelegalissuesofconsiderationinthedevelopmentofblockchain.
UNITI:Basics:DistributedDatabase,TwoGeneralProblem,ByzantineGeneralproblemandFault
Tolerance,HadoopDistributedFileSystem,DistributedHashTable,ASICresistance,TuringComplete.
Cryptography:Hashfunction,DigitalSignature-ECDSA,MemoryHardAlgorithm,ZeroKnowledge
Proof.
UNITII:Blockchain:Introduction,Advantageoverconventionaldistributeddatabase,BlockchainNetwork,
MiningMechanism,DistributedConsensus,MerklePatriciaTree,GasLimit,TransactionsandFee,
Anonymity,Reward,ChainPolicy,LifeofBlockchainapplication,Soft&HardFork,PrivateandPublic
blockchain.
UNITIII:DistributedConsensus:Nakamotoconsensus,ProofofWork,ProofofStake,ProofofBurn,
DifficultyLevel,SybilAttack,Energyutilizationandalternate.
UNITIV:Cryptocurrency:History,DistributedLedger,Bitcoinprotocols-Miningstrategyandrewards,
Ethereum-Construction,DAO,SmartContract,GHOST,Vulnerability,Attacks,Sidechain,Namecoin
UNITV:CryptocurrencyRegulation:Stakeholders,RootsofBitcoin,LegalAspects-Cryptocurrency
Exchange,BlackMarketandGlobalEconomy.Applications:InternetofThings,MedicalRecord
ManagementSystem,DomainNameServiceandfutureofBlockchain.
UNITVI-(TrendsandTopics)-ZeroKnowledgeproofsandprotocolsinBlockchain-Succinctnon
interactiveargumentforKnowledge(SNARK)-pairingonEllipticcurves-Zcash.
TEXTBOOK:
1.ArvindNarayanan,JosephBonneau,EdwardFelten,AndrewMillerandStevenGoldfeder,Bitcoinand
CryptocurrencyTechnologies:AComprehensiveIntroduction,PrincetonUniversityPress(July19,
2016).
REFERENCES:
1.Antonopoulos,MasteringBitcoin:UnlockingDigitalCryptocurrencies
2.SatoshiNakamoto,Bitcoin:APeer-to-PeerElectronicCashSystem
3.DR.GavinWood,―ETHEREUM:ASecureDecentralizedTransactionLedger,Yellowpaper.2014.
4.NicolaAtzei,MassimoBartoletti,andTizianaCimoli,AsurveyofattacksonEthereumsmartcontracts
LTP/DC
3003

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
96
SyllabusforB.TechIVYearIsemester
ElectronicsandComputerEngineering
AGILESOFTWAREDEVELOPMENT
(ProfessionalElective-IV)
Code:9FC16
Prerequisite:SoftwareEngineeringandOOAD
CourseObjectives:
1.OrganizeAgileSoftwareDevelopment,ExtremeProgrammingandSoftwareDevelopmentRhythms.
2.Describetheiruniquefeaturesrelativetotraditionalsoftwarepractices
3.Examinetheirapplicationsintherealworldandaddressestheirimpactsondevelopingsoftware.
CourseOutcomes:
1.Summarizethevariousagilemethodologies:extremeprogramming,scrum,andfeaturedrivenprogramming.
2.ApplytheXPpractices,pairprogrammingandagilemodelingforrealtimeprojects.
3.ApplyXPtoasmallproject.
4.ExaminetheprocessofFeature-DrivenDevelopmentandRegainingControl.
5.RelateAgileModelingandRUPandChooseToolstohelpwithAgileDevelopment.
UNIT-I
Introduction:AgileMethods,AgileManifesto,andAgileModelingIntroduction,WhatisAgile,TheAgile
Manifesto,AgileMethods,XP:ExtremeProgramming,DSDM,SCRUM,Feature-DrivenDevelopment,
ModelingMisconceptions,AgileModeling,ToolsofMisconceptions,UpdatingAgileModels
UNIT-II
ExtremeProgramming:Introduction,CoreXPValues,TheTwelveXPPractices,AboutExtreme
Programming,PlanningXPProjects,TestFirstCoding,MakingPairProgrammingWork
UNIT-III
AgileModelingandXP:Introduction,TheFit,CommonPractices,ModelingSpecificPractices,XP
ObjectionstoAgileModeling,AgileModelingandPlanningXPProjects,XP
ImplementationPhase
UNIT-IV
Feature-DrivenDevelopment:Introduction,IncrementalSoftwareDevelopment,RegainingControl:The
MotivationbehindFDD,PlanninganIterativeProject,ArchitectureCentric,FDDandXP
UNIT-V
AgileMethodswithRUPandPRINCE2andToolsandObstacles:AgileModelingandRUP,FDDandRUP,
AgileMethodsandPRINCE2,ToolstoHelpwithAgileDevelopment,Eclipse:AnAgileIDE.
UNIT-VI
ObstaclestoAgileSoftwareDevelopment,ManagementIntransigence,TheFailedProjectSyndrome,
ContractualDifficulties,FamiliaritywithAgility
TextBooks:
1.Agilesoftwareconstruction,1/e,Johnhunt,springer,2005
2.AgileandIterativeDevelopment:amanager&#39;sguide,Addison-WesleyCraigLarman,
PearsonEducation-2004.
LTP/DC
3003

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
97
ReferenceBooks:
1.TheArtofAgileDevelopment,Pearson,RobertC.Martin,Juli,JamesShore,Chromatic,2013,O‘Reilly
Media.
2.AgileTesting,ElisabethHendrickson,QualityTreeSoftwareInc2008.

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
98
SyllabusforB.TechIVYearIsemester
ElectronicsandComputerEngineering
LOWPOWERVLSIDESIGN
(ProfessionalElective-IV)
Code:9C730
Pre-Requisites:DLD,VLSIDesign
CourseObjectives:TheobjectivesoftheLowPowerVLSIDesigncoursearetoequipstudentswithcomprehensive
knowledgeandpracticalskillsinunderstandingpowerdissipationmechanisms,estimatingandanalyzingpower
consumption,implementinglowpowerdesigntechniques,andutilizingadvancedtoolsandmethodologiestodesign
energy-efficientVLSIcircuitsandsystems.
CourseOutcomes:
Bytheendofthecourse,studentswillbeableto
CO1.Understandthelowpowerdesign
CO2.LearnBiCMOSprocesses
CO3.Applylowpowerconceptsfordifferentlogiccircuits.
CO4.Differentiatelowpowerlatchesandflipflops.
UNITI
Introduction,Low-Powerdesignanoverview,Low-Voltage,Low-Powerdesignlimitations:Power
supplyvoltage,Thresholdvoltage,ScalingandInterconnectwires.
UNITII
BiCMOSProcesses:BiCMOSprocessusingN-WellProcess,BICMOSprocessusingP-WellProcessand
BICMOSprocessusingTwin-WellProcess.
BiCMOSmanufacturingandIntegrationconsiderations:ProcessconsiderationsforCMOSdevicestructures,
ProcessconsiderationsforBipolarTransistors.
UNITIII
IsolationinBiCMOS:IsolationinBipolartransistors-JunctionisolationintheSBCprocess,Collector
diffusionisolation;IsolationinMOStransistors-LocaloxidationofSilicon,Deeptrenchisolation.
UNITIV
Low-Voltage,Low-PowerLogicCircuits-I:ConventionalCMOSlogicgates-PowerdissipationinCMOS
inverter,BasicNANDandNORgates,ConventionalBiCMOSlogicgates-BiCMOSinverter,Basicdriver
configurations.Fullswingwithshuntingdevices.
UNITV
Low-Voltage,Low-PowerLogicCircuits-II:FullswingcomplementaryMOS/Bipolarlogiccircuit,Full
swingcomplementaryMOS/Bipolarlogiccircuitwithfeedback,MergedBiCMOSdigitalcircuit,
ComplementaryBiCMOScircuits.
UNITVI
Low-PowerLatchesandFlip-Flops:Introduction,EvolutionofLatchesandFlip-Flops.
LTP/DC
3003

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
99
TEXTBOOKS
1.CMOS/BiCMOSULSIlowvoltage,lowpowerbyYeo,Rofail,Goh(3Authors)-PearsonEducationAsia
1stIndianreprint,2002
REFERENCES
1.DigitalIntegratedcircuits,J.RabaeyPH.N.J1996
2.CMOSDigitalICs,Sung-moKangandYusufLeblebici3rdeditionTMH2003(chapter11)
3.VLSIDSPsystems,Parhi,JohnWiley&amp;sons,2003(chapter17)
4.IEEETransElectronDevices,IEEEJ.SolidStateCircuits,andotherNationalandInternational
ConferencesandSymposia

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
100
SyllabusforB.TechIVYearIsemester
ElectronicsandComputerEngineering
EMBEDDEDREALTIMEOPERATINGSYSTEMS
(ProfessionalElective-IV)
Code:9C731
Courseoutcomes:
1.UnderstandtheBasicconceptsofUNIXoperatingSystemsandfiles,commandsusage.
2.UnderstandtheRealtimeSystemsconceptsandclassificationofRealtimesystems.
3.Designconceptsofschedulingalgorithmsanditsapplications.
4.UnderstandtheInterprocesscommunicationsanditsapplicationsinRealtimesystems.
5.UnderstandtheExceptionalhandlingandInterruptsandTimers
6.UnderstandthecasestudyofRTOS.
UNIT–I
Introduction:IntroductiontoUNIX/LINUX,OverviewofCommands,FileI/O,(open,create,close,
lseek,read,write),ProcessControl(fork,vfork,exit,wait,waitpid,exec).
UNIT-II
RealTimeOperatingSystems:BriefHistoryofOS,DefiningRTOS,TheScheduler,Objects,Services,
CharacteristicsofRTOS,DefiningaTask,TasksStatesandScheduling,TaskOperations,Structure,
Synchronization,CommunicationandConcurrency.DefiningSemaphores,OperationsandUse,Defining
MessageQueue,States,Content,Storage,OperationsandUse.
UnitIII:Scheduling
CommonlyusedApproachestoRealTimeSchedulingClockDriven,WeightedRoundRobin,Priority
Driven,DynamicVsStateSystems,EffectivereleasetimeandDeadlines,OfflineVsOnlineScheduling.
UNIT-IV
Inter-processCommunication
Inter-processCommunicationandSynchronizationofProcesses,TasksandThreads-MultipleProcess.
ProblemofSharingdatabymultipletasks&routines,Inter-processcommunication
UNIT-V
Exceptions,InterruptsandTimers:Exceptions,Interrupts,Applications,ProcessingofExceptions
andSpuriousInterrupts,RealTimeClocks,ProgrammableTimers,TimerInterruptServiceRoutines
(ISR),SoftTimers,Operations.
UNIT-VI
CaseStudiesofRTOS:RTLinux,MicroC/OS-II,VxWorks,EmbeddedLinux,andTinyOS.
TEXTBOOK:
1.EmbeddedSystems-Architecture,ProgrammingandDesignbyRajkamal,2
nd
ed.,2008,TMH.
2.RealTimeSystems-JaneW.S.Liu-PHI.
3.RealTimeSystems-C.M.Krishna,KANGG.Shin,1996,TMH
4.QingLi,“RealTimeConceptsforEmbeddedSystems”,2011,Elsevier.
LTP/DC
3003

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
101
REFERENCEBOOKS:
1.Rajkamal,“EmbeddedSystems-Architecture,Programming,andDesign”,2007,TMH.
2.W.RichardStevens,StephanA.Rago,“AdvancedUNIXProgramming”,2006,2ndEdition,Pearson.
3.Dr.CraigHollabaugh,“EmbeddedLinux:Hardware,SoftwareandInterfacing”,2008,1
st
Edition,
Pearson.

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
102
SyllabusforB.TechIVYearIIsemester
ElectronicsandComputerEngineering
MAJORPROJECT
Code:9D875
CourseObjectives:
Toenhancetheknowledgeonselectingaproject,learnrelatedtoolsandenhanceprogrammingandcommunication
skillsforemployability.
CourseOutcomes:
Attheendofthiscourse,thestudentswillbeableto
1.Estimatethehumanandphysicalresourcesrequired,andmakeplanforthedevelopmentofProject
2.BreakdowntheProjectintotasksanddeterminehandoverprocedures
3.Identifylinksanddependencies,andscheduletoachievedeliverables
4.Allocateroleswithclearlinesofresponsibilityandaccountabilitywithteamspirit.
5.Designanddevelopthesoftwareorprototypeusingmodernsoftwaretoolswhereverapplicabletomeetsocietal
needs
6.
PresenttheProjectdoneandsubmitthereport.
Aprojectshallbecarriedoutbyagroupofstudentsconsistingof1or2to3innumberinfourthyearsecond
semester.Thisworkshallbecarriedoutundertheguidanceofthefacultyassignedasinternalguideand
shallinvolvedesign,fabrication,softwaredevelopmentoranyothersignificantactivity.Thiscanbeof
interdisciplinarynaturealso.
Outoftotal100marksforprojectwork(inthefinalyearsecondsemester),40marksshallbeforContinues
InternalEvaluationand60marksfortheSemesterExternalEvaluationattheendoftheSemester.
SemesterEndExternalEvaluationoftheproject(viva-voce)shallbeconductedbyacommitteeappointed
bytheChiefSuperintendent.Thecommitteeconsistsofanexternalexaminer,HOD,aSeniorFaculty
MemberandInternalGuide.
DivisionofMarksforContinuesInternalEvaluation–40marks
S.NoDescriptionMarks
1AbstractSeminarattheendof3weeks5
2DesignSeminarattheendof8weeks5
3Implementation/DemonstrationofSeminarattheendof12weeks10
4EvaluationofProjectbyInternalGuide10
5ProjectReport10
Total40
DivisionofMarksforSemesterEndExternalEvaluation–60Marks
S.NoDescriptionMarks
1FinalProjectReport10
2Presentation20
3Demonstration/DefenseofProject30
Total60
LTP/DC
002010

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
103
SyllabusforB.TechIVYearIIsemester
ElectronicsandComputerEngineering
PROJECTANDRISKMANAGEMENT
(OpenElective-III)
Code:9ZC19
CourseObjective:TheobjectiveofthecourseistoprovidestudentswithdetailedknowledgeofProjectManagement
andRiskmanagementavenuesformakingbetterfinancialdecisions.
CourseOutcomes:
1.Gainknowledgeregardingproject,itslifecycleandorganization
2.Understandtheprocessofprojectformulation
3.Describetheprocedureforprojectimplementation
4.Identifytheriskmanagementprocessandmethods
5.UnderstandtheroleofDerivativesasariskmanagementtool
6.CreateawarenessonOptionsandSwapsasatoolforriskmitigation
UNITI
BASICSOFPROJECTMANAGEMENT:Conceptandcharacteristicsofaproject-typesofprojects-
Projectlifecycle-Challengesandproblemsofprojectmanagement-Qualities&functionsofaproject
manager.
UNIT-II
PROJECTFORMULATION:GenerationofProjectIdeas;Monitoringtheenvironment;Preliminary
ScreeningofProjects;Feasibilitystudy;ProjectSelection,DetailedProjectReport:Market,Technical,
FinancialandEconomicaspects
UNITIII
PROJECTIMPLEMENTATION:Pre-requisitesforSuccessfulProjectImplementation;Controlof
in-progressProjects(Ganttchart,PERT,CPM);FinancingofProjects,ProjectRiskManagementProcess,
Post-audit;AbandonmentAnalysis
UNIT-IV
RISKMANAGEMENT:Risk–Definition,TypesofRisk,ApproachestoRiskManagement,Risk
ManagementProcessandTechniques.
UNIT-V
DERIVATIVES–I:IntroductiontoFinancialDerivatives,TypesofDerivativeInstruments–Forwards,
Futures,DifferencesbetweenForwardsandFutures,MarginLimits.
UNIT-V1
DERIVATIVES–II:
a)Options:Definition,OperationofOptioncontracts,CallOption,PutOption,FactorsdeterminingOption
values.
b)Swaps:Definition,TypesofSwapagreements,MechanicsofInterestrateswaps,MechanicsofCurrency
swaps.
LTP/DC
3003

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
104
EssentialReadings:
●H.Nandan,FundamentalsofEntrepreneurship,PrenticeHallofIndia,FirstEdition,NewDelhi,
2007.
●JeffreyK.Pinto“ProjectManagement”,2
nd
edition,Pearson
●DhandapaniAlagiri“StructuredFinance–Concepts&Perspectives”,ICFAIUniversitypress.
●ProjectsbyPrasannaChandra,McGraw-HillPublishingCo.Ltd
References:
●ProjectManagement:SystemsapproachtoPlanningSchedulingandControlling,H.Kerzner.
●TheCompleteRealEstateDocumentsbyMazyarM.Hedayat,JohnJ.Oleary
●TheFundamentalsofListingandSellingCommercialRealEstate-ByKeimK.Loren(Author)

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
105
SyllabusforB.TechIVYearIIsemester
ElectronicsandComputerEngineering
PRODUCTANDSERVICES
(OpenElective-III)
Code:9ZC24
CourseObjectives:ThiscoursehelpstoprovidethebasicconceptsofProductandServices.Thiscoursewillenable
thestudentstostudyareasofbasicinsightsinproductmanagementandServicesDesign.
CourseOutComes:
1)Explainthestudentsaboutbasicconceptsofproduct(L2)
2)Demonstratetenthestudentswiththeprocessofnewproductdevelopmentandstagesintheprocess.(L2)
3)Inspectthenewproductusingtesting,productplanningandthepreparatorygroundworkforlaunchinganew
product(L4)
4)Explainsthestudentstounderstandthenatureofservices,itsdifferenceswiththegoodsandtheapplicationof
marketingprinciplesforservices(L2)
5)Examinesthequalityofservicesandalsohelpsinknowingvariousformsofdeliveringservices(L4)
UNIT-I
INTERPRETATIONSONPRODUCT
MeaningofProduct,ProductMarketFitAnalysis,ProductLevels,ProductMix,ProductPruning,and
ProductCannibalization.TypesofProductClassification
UNIT-II
PRODUCTINNOVATIONandVALIDATION
Newproducts-Whatisanewproduct,NewProductDevelopmentProcess,IdeagenerationSystems,
Concepttest,Producttesting,Pre-launch,Markettest,Finalevaluationusing“Stage/GateProcess.Product
Validity,BreakEvenAnalysis,FinancialandMarketAnalysis.
UNIT-III
LAUNCHINGPRODUCT
CostAnalysis,Stepstofixthefinalprice,Promotionplanning,DigitalMarketingandMethods,Retailing,
TypesofRetailingonlineRetailing,PostMarketAnalysisoftheLaunch
UNIT-IV:INTRODUCTIONTOSERVICE:
MeaningandDefinitionofService,CharacteristicsofServices,ClassificationofService,Fivelevelsof
Service,ServiceversesPhysicalGoods,7P’sforMarketingofServices,Servicescape
UNIT–V:SERVICEPROCESSDESIGNandSERVICEDISTRIBUTION:
ServiceDesignMeaning,ToolsforServiceDesign,AttributesofaGoodDesignCustomerinvolvementin
theProductionProcess,RoleofIntermediaries,MethodsofDistributionofServices
UNIT–VI:QUALITYOFSERVICE:DefinitionofServiceQuality,ElementsofServiceQuality,
ServiceQualityMeasuringTools;SERVQUALScale,ServiceQualityGapAnalysis,ObjectiveService
Metrics,CostofQualityinService.ChallengesandProblemsofServiceQualityinIndia.
LTP/DC
3003

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
106
EssentialReadings:
●Dr.S.L.Gupta,ProductManagement,WisdomPublications
●C.MerleCrawford,NewProductManagement
●ValarieA.Zeithaml&MaryJo-Bitner:ServicesMarketing—IntegratingCustomerFocusAcross
theFirm,3/e,TataMcGrawHill,2007.
References:
●ThomasJ.Delong&AsishNanda:ManagingProfessionalServies—TextandCases,McGraw-Hill
International,2006.
●ChristopherLovelock:ServicesMarketingPeople,Technology,Strategy,FourthEdition,Pearson
Education,2006

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
107
SyllabusforB.TechIVYearIIsemester
ElectronicsandComputerEngineering
ENTREPRENEURSHIPANDBUSINESSDESIGN
(OpenElective-III)
Code:9ZC10
CourseObjective:Theobjectiveofthecourseistomakestudentsunderstandtheessentialsofbuildingtheirstartups
andtofamiliarizewithbusinessdesignprocessdevelopbusinessmodels,andmarkettheirproduct.
CourseOutcomes:
1.Explainsthestudentstounderstandknowledgeontheessentialsofentrepreneurshipandthekeyroleplayed
bytheentrepreneurs.(L2)
2.DistinguishesthedifferentphasesofUI/UX.(L4)
3.Developtheattentivenessondesigningabusinessstrategy(L6)
4.Demonstratestounderstandreverseengineeringmethodsinproductdevelopment.(L2)
5.ExplainsthestudentstounderstandonIPR,andpatentapplication.(L2)
UNITI:IntroductiontoEntrepreneurship:MeaningofEntrepreneurship.Reasonsfeedingthe
Entrepreneurialfire.UnderstandingEntrepreneurshipasaProcess.MultiplerolesofEntrepreneur:
Intrapreneur,Inventor,Coordinator,ManagerandController.Psychologicalandbehavioralaspectsof
First-GenerationEntrepreneur.
UNITII:IntroductiontoUI/UX:Humancentereddesignandbenefits,thedistinctionbetweenUXandUI,
UXprocess–userresearch,prototypingstrategies,UIprinciples,UIanalysis,UIdesign,UIcomponents
andResponsivedesign.
UNITIII:DesigningaBusinessStrategy:Defineaproblemandframeastrategicquestion,mapthelives
ofusers,journeymappingandideation,colortheory,killingtheideasthroughStageGateModels,pitching
offull-fledged,idea,choosingtheStart-UpTeam.
UNITIV:DesigningServicesandServicesDelivery:Servicesassolutions,Servicedeliverypathways,
rapidbrandingandmarketingstrategies,keymetricsforDesignthinking.TypesofNewservices,Mixof
coreservicesandsecondaryandenhancingservices,serviceflowerandservicedesignmatrix.
UNITV:BusinessModel:Meaningofbusinessmodel,Differencebetweenbusinessmodelandbusiness
planning,thebusinessmodelcanvas,RisksandAssumptions,Validationofbusinessmodels,building
solutiondemoandMVP,revenuestreamsandpricingstrategies.
UNITVI:EntrepreneurialFundingandRiskManagement:Bootstrapping,AngelInvestors,Venture
capitalists,Privateequityfunding,customeracquisition,returnonequityandBreakevenanalysis,Risk
propensityVs.Riskavoidance,Locusofcontrolofentrepreneur,Riskestimationtechniques,riskavoidance
strategies.
EssentialReadings:
1.AdrianMcEwen,HakimCassimally–“DesigningtheInternetofThings”,WileyPublications,2012
2.Hedman,J.,&Kalling,T.(2003).Thebusinessmodelconcept:theoreticalunderpinningsand
empiricalillustrations.Europeanjournalofinformationsystems,12(1),49-59.
3.Cabrera,J.(2017).ModularDesignFrameworks:AProjects-basedGuideforUI/UXDesigners.
Apress.
References:
LTP/DC
3003

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
108
1.J.ChrisLeach&RonaldW.Melicher“EntrepreneurialFinance,FourthEdition”,SouthWestern,
CengageLearning,2012.
2.RobertD.Hisrich&VelandRamadani–“EffectiveEntrepreneurialManagement,Strategy,
Planning,RiskManagement,andOrganization”,Springer,2017.
3.Mæhlum,A.R.(2017).ExtendingtheTILESToolkit-fromIdeationtoPrototyping(Master'sthesis,
NTNU).
4.Norman,D.(2013).Thedesignofeverydaythings:Revisedandexpandededition.Basic

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
109
SyllabusforB.TechIVYearIIsemester
ElectronicsandComputerEngineering
POWERELECTRONICDEVICESANDCONVERTERS
(OpenElective-III)
Code:9AC47
CourseObjective:
Withtheadventofsemiconductordevices,Revolutionistakingplaceinthepowertransmissiondistributionand
utilization.Thiscourseintroducesthebasicconceptsofpowersemiconductordevices,Convertersandchoppersand
theiranalysis.
CourseOutcomes:
Aftercompletionofthiscoursethestudentsareableto
1)Understandtheconstructionandoperationofvariouspowersemiconductordevicesandanalyzeaboutthe
seriesandparalleloperationofSCRs.
2)Analyzetheoperationofdifferentconfigurationsofsinglephaseconvertersfordifferentloads.
3)Analyzetheoperationofdifferentconfigurationsofthreephaseconvertersfordifferentloads.
4)Explaintheoperationofdifferenttype’schoppers.
5)Explaintheoperationofinverterandapplicationsofinverters.
6)ExplaintheworkingofanACvoltagecontrollerandCyclo-Convertersfordifferentconfigurations.
UNIT–IPOWERSEMICONDUCTORDEVICES:
Thyristors,SiliconControlledRectifiers(SCR’s),BJT,PowerMOSFET,PowerIGBT,DIAC,TRIAC,
GTOandtheircharacteristics.BasictheoryofoperationofSCR,Staticcharacteristics,Twotransistor
analogy,Turnonandturnoffmethods,DynamiccharacteristicsofSCR,TurnonandTurnoffmechanism.,
SCR,UJTfiringcircuit,SeriesandparallelconnectionsofSCR’s,Snubbercircuitdetails,Specifications
andRatingsofSCR’s,BJT,IGBT.
UNIT–IISINGLEPHASECONTROLLEDCONVERTERS:
Phasecontroltechnique,SinglePhaseLinecommutatedconverters,MidpointandBridgeconnections;Half
controlledandFullycontrolledconverters,DerivationofaverageloadvoltageandcurrentwithRandRL
loads,
UNIT–IIITHREEPHASECONTROLLEDCONVERTERS:
ThreephasehalfcontrolledandfullycontrolledbridgeconverterswithRandRLloads,EffectofSource
inductance,Waveforms,NumericalProblems.
UNIT–IVCHOPPERS:
Choppers,TimeratiocontrolandCurrentlimitcontrolstrategies,StepdownchoppersDerivationofload
voltageandcurrentswithR,RLandRLEloads,StepupChopper,loadvoltageexpression,Joneschopper
andwaveforms,Problems,Buck,Boost,Buck-Boostchoppers.(Qualitativetreatment).
UNIT–VINVERTERS:
Inverters,Singlephaseinverter,HalfandFullbridgeVSI&CSIinverters,Waveforms,Voltagecontrol
techniquesforinverters,Threephaseinverterswith120degreesand180degreesmodeofconduction,Pulse
widthmodulationtechniques(MultiplePulseandSinusoidal),Numericalproblems.
UNIT–VIACVOLTAGECONTROLLERS&CYCLOCONVERTERS:
ACvoltagecontrollers,SinglephasetwoSCR’sinanti-parallelwithRandRLloads,DerivationofRMS
loadvoltage,currentandpowerfactorwaveforms,Firingcircuits,Numericalproblems,Cycloconverters,
SinglephasemidpointcycloconverterswithResistiveandinductiveload(Principleofoperationonly),
Bridgeconfigurationofsinglephasecycloconverter(Principleofoperationonly),Waveforms
LTP/DC
3003

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
110
TEXTBOOKS:
1.PowerElectronics-P.S.Bimbhra,KhannaPublishers.
2.PowerElectronicsCircuits,DevicesandApplications-M.H.Rashid,PrenticeHallofIndia,2
nd
edition.
REFERENCES:
1.PowerElectronics-VedamSubramanyam,NewAgeInternational(P)Limited,Publishers.
2.PowerElectronics-V.R.Murthy1stedition,OXFORDUniversityPress.
3.PowerElectronics-P.C.Sen,TataMcGrawHillPublishing.
4.PowerElectronics-M.D.Singh&K.B.Kanchandhani,TataMcGrawHillPublishingCompany.

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
111
SyllabusforB.TechIVYearIIsemester
ElectronicsandComputerEngineering
PRINCIPLESOFAUTOMATIONANDROBOTICS
(OpenElective-III)
Code:9BC53
CourseOutcomes:
Aftercompletingthesubject,studentswillbeableto:
Understandaproductionsystem,principlesofautomobile
understandthemethodsofworkparttransfermechanicalbufferstoragecontrolfunctions
understandtheimplementationofautomatedflowlines
knowtheanalysisanddesignofmaterialhandlingsystems,automatedguidedvehiclesystem
understandadaptivecontrolsystemsandApplications.
understandingthebusinessprocessEngineering.ConceptofconcurrentEngineering,techniquesofrapid
prototype.
UNIT–I
Introduction:Productionsystem,Automatedmanufacturingsystems,Reasons,Principlesandstrategiesof
automation,Basicelementsofautomatedsystem,pneumaticandhydrauliccircuitcomponents,Assembly
systemandlinebalancing:ManualAssemblyprocess,andworktransportsystems,Linepacing,Analysisof
manualassemblylines,linebalancingmethods-problems,waysofimprovinglinebalance
lines.
UNIT–II
AnalysisofAutomatedflowlines:Systemconfiguration,Workparttransfer,Generalterminologyand
analysisoftransferlineswithoutandwithbufferstorage.
AutomatedAssemblysystems:FundamentalsandDesignofassemblysystems.
UNIT–III
Automatedmaterialhandling:Principles,Typesofequipment,functions,analysisanddesignofmaterial
handlingsystems,conveyorsystems,automatedguidedvehiclesystems-technology,Analysisofmaterial
transportsystems.
Automatedstoragesystems:Basicterminology,AS/RS;Carouselstorage,workinprocessstorage,
UNIT–IV
Adaptivecontrolsystems:Introduction,Adaptivecontrolwithoptimization,Adaptivecontrolwith
constraints,ApplicationofA.C.inMachiningoperations.Useofvariousparameterssuchascuttingforce,
Temperature,vibrationandacousticemission.ConceptofConcurrentEngineering,MRP,MRPII,
TechniquesofRapidPrototyping.
Unit–V:Robotics:
ClassificationandstructureofRoboticsystems,structureofcontinuouspathrobotsystems,drivesand
controlsystems,controlapproachesforrobots.
Unit–VII
Robotarmkinematics,thedirectkinematicsproblemandinversekinematicsolutions,planningof
manipulatortrajectories,robotsensors,rangesensors,proximitysensors,touchsensors,forceandtorque
sensors,programming,manualteaching,leadthroughteaching,programminglanguages,storingand
operatingtaskprogrammes,robotselectionandapplication.
TEXTBOOKS:
LTP/DC
3003

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
112
1.Automation,ProductionSystemsandComputerIntegratedManufacturing:M.P.Groover./PE/PHI
2.MittalandNagrath,‘RoboticsandControl’,TataMcGrawHill.
REFERENCES:
1.ComputercontrolofManufacturingSystemsbyYoramCoreom.
2.CAD/CAM/CIMbyRadhakrishnan.

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
113
SyllabusforB.TechIVYearIIsemester
ElectronicsandComputerEngineering
CLOUDCOMPUTING
(ProfessionalElective-V)
Code:9FC17
COURSEOBJECTIVES:
Understandthebasiccharacteristicsofcloudcomputingandtechnologiesthatsupporttoimplementcloudcomputing.
Analyzethebasiccloudcomputingmodelsthatareusedtoimplementcloudtechnologyandavailablecloudresources
inthemarket.Analyzingthesecurityissuesincloudcomputingenvironmentandunderstandingdifferentcasestudies
incloudcomputingandIOTplatform.
COURSEOUTCOMES:
Attheendofthiscourse,thestudentswillbeableto
1.Summarizethecharacteristicsofcloudanddifferentiatethecloudserviceanddeploymentmodelsandtoexplore
vendorspecificservices
2.Analyzedifferentarchitecturesforcloudapplications,CreateandrunAmazonec2instancethroughpython
programs,assesstheperformanceofcloudservicesandsummarizetheinnovativeapplicationsofIOToncloud.
3.DesignarchitectureofanAppssuchasmapreduce,imageprocessingappetconcloudandunderstandvarious
securityaspectsincloud.
UNIT-I
IntroductiontoCloudComputing:Introduction,characteristics,CloudModelsandexamples,Applications
ofCloudServices.CloudConceptsandTechnologies.
UNIT-II
CloudServicesandPlatforms:ComputeServices,StorageServices,DatabaseServices,Application
Services,ContentDeliveryServices,AnalyticsServices,DeploymentandManagementServices,Identity
andAccessManagementServices,OpenSourcePrivatecloudSoftware.
UNIT-III
CloudApplicationDesign:DesignConsiderationsforCloudApplication,ReferenceArchitecturesfor
CloudApplications.CloudApplicationDesignMethodologies,DataStorageApproaches.PythonFor
Cloud:PythonforAmazonWebServices,MapReduce
UNIT–IV
book2.CloudandtheInternetofThings:PerformanceofDistributedSystemsandtheCloud-Enabling
TechnologiesfortheInternetofThings-InnovativeApplicationsoftheInternetofThings-OnlineSocial
andProfessionalNetworking
UNIT-V
CloudApplicationDevelopmentinPython:DesignApproaches,ImageProcessingApp,DocumentStorage
App,MapReduceApp,SocialMediaAnalyticsApp.
UNIT-VI
CloudSecurity:Introduction,CloudSecurityArchitecture(CSA),Authentication,Authorization,Identity
AccessManagement(IAM),DataSecurity,KeyManagement,Auditing.
CloudforIndustry,HealthcareandEducation.
LTP/DC
3003

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
114
TEXTBOOKS:
1.CloudComputing–AHandsonApproach,Arshdeep,VijayMedisetti,UniversityPress.
2.DistributedandCloudComputing,1stEdition,FromParallelProcessingtotheInternetof
Things,Authors:KaiHwangJackDongarraGeoffreyFox(Unit4)
3.CloudComputing:RajKumarBuyya,JamesBroberg,AndrzejGOscinski,Wiley.
REFERENCES:
1.CloudComputing:Dr.KumarSaurabWileyIndia2011.
2.Codeinthecloudcomputing:KChandrasekharanCRCPress.
3.CloudCompuitng:JohnW.Rittinghouse,JamesRansome,CRCpress.
4.VirtualizationSecurity:DaveShackleford2013,SYBEXaWillyBrand.
5.CloudComputingandSoftwareService:Ahson,iiyas.2011.
6.CloudComputingBible:Sosinsky2012WileyIndia.

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
115
SyllabusforB.TechIVYearIIsemester
ElectronicsandComputerEngineering
ETHICALHACKING
(ProfessionalElective-V)
Code:9JC04
Prerequisite:Knowledgeininformationsecurity,Webapplication
CourseObjectives:
1.Introducethemethodologiesandframeworkofethicalhackingforenhancingthesecurity.
2.Thecourseincludes-ImpactsofHacking;TypesofHackers;InformationSecurityModels;InformationSecurity
Program;BusinessPerspective;PlanningaControlledAttack.
CourseOutcomes:
Attheendofthiscourse,thestudentwillbeableto
1.Gaintheknowledgeoftheuseandavailabilityoftoolstosupportanethicalhack.
2.Interprettheresultsofacontrolledattack.
3.Explaintheroleofinherentandimposedlimitationsandmetricsforplanningofatest.
4.Comprehendthedangersassociatedwithpenetrationtesting.
UNIT-I
Introduction:HackingImpacts,TheHackerFramework:Planningthetest,SoundOperations,
Reconnaissance,Enumeration,VulnerabilityAnalysis,Exploitation,FinalAnalysis,Deliverable,
Integration
InformationSecurityModels:ComputerSecurity,NetworkSecurity,ServiceSecurity,Application
Security,SecurityArchitecture
UNIT-II
InformationSecurityProgram:TheProcessofInformationSecurity,ComponentPartsofInformation
SecurityProgram,RiskAnalysisandEthicalHacking
TheBusinessPerspective:BusinessObjectives,SecurityPolicy,PreviousTestResults,Business
Challenges
UNIT-III
PlanningforaControlledAttack:InherentLimitations,ImposedLimitations,timingisEverything,Attack
Type,SourcePoint,RequiredKnowledge,Multi-PhasedAttacks,TeamingandAttackStructure,
EngagementPlanner,TheRightSecurityConsultant,TheTester,Logistics,Intermediates,Law
Enforcement
UNIT-IV
PreparingforaHack:TechnicalPreparation,ManagingtheEngagementReconnaissance:Social
Engineering,PhysicalSecurity,InternetReconnaissance
UNIT-V
Enumeration:EnumerationTechniques,SoftObjective,LookingAroundorAttack,Elementsof
Enumeration,PreparingfortheNextPhase
Exploitation:IntuitiveTesting,Evasion,ThreadsandGroups,OperatingSystems,PasswordCrackers,
RootKits,applications,Wardialing,Network,ServicesandAreasofConcern
UNIT-VI
Deliverable:TheDeliverable,TheDocument,OverallStructure,AligningFindings,Presentation
Integration:IntegratingtheResults,IntegrationSummary,Mitigation,DefensePlanning,Incident
Management,SecurityPolicy,Conclusion
LTP/DC
3003

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
116
TEXTBOOK:
1.JamesS.Tiller,―TheEthicalHack:AFrameworkforBusinessValuePenetrationTestingǁ,Auerbach
Publications,CRCPress
REFERENCEBOOKS:
1.EC-Council,―EthicalHackingandCountermeasuresAttackPhasesǁ,CengageLearning
2.MichaelSimpson,KentBackman,JamesCorley,―Hands-OnEthicalHackingandNetworkDefenseǁ,
CengageLearning

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
117
SyllabusforB.TechIVYearIIsemester
ElectronicsandComputerEngineering
ADVANCEDALGORITHMS
(ProfessionalElective-V)
Code:9EC23
Pre-requisites:
1.Acourseon“ComputerProgramming&DataStructures”
2.Acourseon“AdvancedDataStructures&Algorithms”
CourseObjectives:
Introducestherecurrencerelationsforanalyzingthealgorithms
Introducesthegraphsandtheirtraversals.
Describesmajoralgorithmictechniques(divide-and-conquer,greedy,dynamicprogramming,
BruteForce,TransformandConquerapproaches)andmentionproblemsforwhicheach
techniqueisappropriate;
Describeshowtoevaluateandcomparedifferentalgorithmsusingworst-case,average-caseandbest-case
analysis.
Introducesstringmatchingalgorithms
Introduceslinearprogramming.
CourseOutcomes:
Abilitytoanalyzetheperformanceofalgorithms
Abilitytochooseappropriatedatastructuresandalgorithmdesignmethodsforaspecified
application
Abilitytounderstandhowthechoiceofdatastructuresandthealgorithmdesignmethods
impacttheperformanceofprograms
UNIT–I
Introduction:RoleofAlgorithmsincomputing,OrderNotation,Recurrences,ProbabilisticAnalysisand
RandomizedAlgorithms.SortingandOrderStatistics:Heapsort,QuicksortandSortinginLinearTime.
AdvancedDesignandAnalysisTechniques:DynamicProgramming-MatrixchainMultiplication,Longest
commonSubsequenceandoptimalbinarySearchtrees.
UNIT-II
GreedyAlgorithms-HuffmanCodes,ActivitySelectionProblem.AmortizedAnalysis.
GraphAlgorithms:TopologicalSorting,MinimumSpanningtrees,SingleSourceShortestPaths,
MaximumFlowalgorithms.
UNIT-III
SortingNetworks:ComparisonNetworks,Zero-oneprinciple,bitonicSortingNetworks,MergingNetwork,
SortingNetwork.
MatrixOperations-Strassen'sMatrixMultiplication,Invertingmatrices,SolvingsystemoflinearEquations
UNIT-IV
StringMatching:NaiveStringMatching,Rabin-Karpalgorithm,matchingwithfiniteAutomata,
KnuthMorris-Prattalgorithm.
UNIT-V
NP-CompletenessandApproximationAlgorithms:Polynomialtime,polynomialtimeverification,
NP-Completenessandreducibility,NP-Completeproblems.ApproximationAlgorithms-Vertexcovers
Problem,TravellingSalespersonproblem
TEXTBOOK:
1.IntroductiontoAlgorithms,''T.H.Cormen,C.E.Leiserson,R.L.Rivest,andC.Stein,ThirdEdition,PHI.
LTP/DC
3003

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
118
REFERENCEBOOKS:
1.FundamentalsofComputerAlgorithms,EllisHorowitz,SatrajSahniandRajasekharam,Galgotia
publicationspvt.Ltd.
2.DesignandAnalysisAlgorithms-ParagHimanshuDave,HimanshuBhalchandraDavePublisher:
Pearson
3.AlgorithmDesign:Foundations,AnalysisandInternetexamples,M.T.GoodrichandR.Tomassia,John
Wileyandsons.
4.DatastructuresandAlgorithmAnalysisinC++,AllenWeiss,Secondedition,Pearsoneducation

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
119
SyllabusforB.TechIVYearIIsemester
ElectronicsandComputerEngineering
DESIGNOFFAULTTOLERANTSYSTEM
(ProfessionalElective-V)
Code:9C834
CourseObjectives:
1.
ToprovideorbroadunderstandingoffaultdiagnosisandtolerantdesignApproach.
2.
Toillustratetheframeworkoftestpatterngenerationusingsemiandfullautomaticapproach.
Courseoutcomes:
Attheendofthecourse,thestudentswillbeableto
1.Acquiretheknowledgeoffundamentalconceptsinfaulttolerantdesign.
2.Explorethedesignrequirementsofselfcheck-incircuits
3.UnderstandTestpatterngenerationusingLFSR
4.Understandthebasicarchitectureandconceptofbuilt-in-selftest.
5.ExplorethevariousBISTtechniques
6.Demonstratetheboundaryscanarchitectures.
UNIT–I
FaultTolerantDesign:Basicconcepts:Reliabilityconcepts,Failures&faults,ReliabilityandFailurerate,
Relationbetweenreliabilityandmeantimebetweenfailure,maintainabilityandavailability,reliabilityof
series,parallelandparallel-seriescombinationalcircuits.
FaultTolerantDesign:Basicconcepts-static,dynamic,hybrid,triplemodularredundantsystem(TMR).
UNIT–II
SelfCheckingcircuits&FailsafeDesign:SelfCheckingCircuits:Basicconceptsofselfcheckingcircuits,
DesignofTotallyselfcheckingchecker,Checkersusingmoutofncodes.
FailSafeDesign:Stronglyfaultsecurecircuits,failsafedesignofsequentialcircuitsusingBergercode.
UNIT-III
DesignforTestability:Designfortestabilityforcombinationalcircuits:BasicconceptsofTestability,
Controllabilityandobservability,TheReedMuller’sexpansiontechnique.
Designfortestabilitybymeansofscan:
TestabilityInsertion,FullscanDFTtechnique-Fullscaninsertion,flip-flopStructures,Fullscandesignand
Test,ScanArchitectures-fullscandesign,Partialscanmethods,multiplescandesign.
UNIT-IV
Built-in-self-test-I:BISTBasics-Memory-basedBIST,BISTeffectiveness,BISTtypes,DesigningaBIST,
TestPatternGeneration-exhaustivecounters,ringcounters,twistedringcounter,Linearfeedbackshift
register,OutputResponseAnalysis-One’scounter,transitioncounter,paritychecking.
UNIT-V
Built-in-self-test-II
BISTarchitectures-AcentralizedandseparateBoard-levelBISTarchitecture,Built-inevaluationandself
test(BEST),LSSDOn-chipselftest,Self–testingusingMISRandSRSG,ConcurrentBIST,BILBO.
UNIT–VI
StandardIEEETestAccessMethods:BoundaryScanBasics,Boundaryscanarchitecture-Testaccess
port,Boundaryscanregisters,TAPcontroller.BoundaryscanTestInstructions,Boardlevelscanchain
structure-Oneserialscanchain,multiple-scanchainwithonecontroltestport,multiple-scanchains.
LTP/DC
3003

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
120
TEXTBOOKS:
1.FaultTolerant&FaultTestableHardwareDesign-ParagK.Lala,1984,PHI
2.DigitalSystemTestandTestableDesignusingHDLmodelsandArchitectures-ZainalabedinNavabi,
SpringerInternationalEdition.
REFERENCES:
1.DigitalSystemsTestingandTestableDesign-MironAbramovici,MelvinA.BreuerandArthurD.
Friedman,JaicoBooks
2.EssentialsofElectronicTesting-Bushnell&VishwaniD.Agarwal,Springers.
3.DesignforTestforDigitalIC’sandEmbeddedCoreSystems-AlfredL.Crouch,2008,Pearson
Education

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
121
SyllabusforB.TechIVYearIIsemester
ElectronicsandComputerEngineering
SYSTEMONCHIPARCHITECTURE
(ProfessionalElective-V)
Code:9C835
Objectives
Aftergoingthroughthiscoursethestudentwillbeableto
UnderstandtheSystemArchitectureandProcessorArchitecture,approachforaSOCDesign.
Learnthe,BasicconceptsinProcessorMicroArchitecture,andLearnDifferentTypesof
ProcessorslikeVLIWProcessors,SuperscalarProcessorsetc.
LearnaboutSOCexternalmemory,ScratchpadsandCachememoryandMultilevelCaches.
LearntheSOCDesignapproach,Designandevaluation,ApplicationsLikeImagecompressionetc
Afterstudyingthiscourse,thestudentswillbeableto
1.KnowbasicsofSystemArchitecture
2.UnderstandthevarioustypesofProcessorslikeVLIWProcessors,SuperscalarProcessors.
3.DistinguishCachememoryandMultilevelCaches,SOCexternalmemory.
4.KnowtheConceptofInterConnectArchitectures,SOCStandardBusesandReconfigurationTechnologies.
5.KnowtheconceptsandissuesrelatedtoInterconnectConfiguration.
6.ExploretheSOCDesignapproachanddevelopitsapplications.
UNIT-I:Introduction
IntroductiontotheSystemApproach:SystemArchitecture,Componentsofthesystem,Hardware&
Software,ProcessorArchitectures,MemoryandAddressing.Systemlevelinterconnection,anapproachfor
SOCDesign,SystemArchitectureandComplexity.
UNIT-II:Processors:
Introduction,ProcessorSelectionforSOC,BasicconceptsinProcessorArchitecture,MicroArchitecture,
BasicelementsinInstructionhandling.Buffers:minimizingPipelineDelays,Branches,MoreRobust
Processors,VectorProcessorsandVectorInstructionsextensions,VLIWProcessors,Superscalar
Processors.
UNIT-III:MemoryDesignforSOC:
OverviewofSOCexternalmemory,InternalMemory,Size,ScratchpadsandCachememory,Cache
Organization,Cachedata,WritePolicies,Strategiesforlinereplacementatmisstime,TypesofCache,
Split–I,andD–Caches,MultilevelCaches,Virtualtorealtranslation,SOCMemorySystem,Modelsof
SimpleProcessor–memoryinteraction.
UNIT-IV:InterconnectCustomizationandConfiguration:
InterConnectArchitectures,Bus:BasicArchitectures,SOCStandardBuses,AnalyticBusModels,Using
theBusmodel,EffectsofBustransactionsandcontentiontime.SOCCustomization:Anoverview,
CustomizingInstructionProcessor.
UNIT-V:InterconnectConfiguration:
ReconfigurationTechnologies,MappingdesignontoReconfigurabledevices,Instance-Specificdesign,
CustomizableSoftProcessor,Reconfiguration–overheadanalysisandtrade-offanalysisonreconfigurable
Parallelism.
UNIT-VI:ApplicationStudies/CaseStudies:
SOCDesignapproach,AESalgorithms,Designandevaluation,Imagecompression–JPEGcompression.
LTP/DC
3003

SNIST-B.Tech(ECM)III&IVYear(A22)
122
TextBooks
●
ComputerSystemDesignSystem-on-Chip–MichaelJ.FlynnandWayneLuk,WielyIndiaPvt.
Ltd.
●
DesignofSystemonaChip:DevicesandComponents–RicardoReis,1stEd.,2004,Springer
ReferenceBooks
●
ARMSystemonChipArchitecture–SteveFurber–2ndEd.,2000,AddisonWesleyProfessional.
●
SystemonChipVerification–MethodologiesandTechniques–PrakashRashinkar,Peter
PatersonandLeenaSinghL,2001,KluwerAcademicPublishers.

===== NEW DOCUMENT: CSCL UNIT 5.pdf - 2026-03-06T05:52:55.231Z =====

UNIT-V

Penalties and Compensation: 
  Penalties, Compensation 
and Adjunction of 
violations of provisions of 
IT Act 2000 and judicial 
review

The Indian law concerning Cyberspace and Internet is covered under 
the IT Act, it provides for basically two types of penalties for 
violation of the provisions of IT Act. 
Civil liability of damages or compensation. 
Criminal liability as punishment for the commission of offences in the 
form of either imprisonment or fine or both for the commission of 
offences by the offenders.
Penalty and Compensation for Damage to Computer or Computer 
System:
Under Section 43 of the IT Act, it has been provided that if any person 
without permission of the owner or any other person who is in 
charge of a computer or computer system or computer network:
(a)
accesses such computer, computer system or computer network or 
computer resource.
(b)
(b) downloads, copies or extracts any data, computer database or 
information from such computer or computer system, or computer

network, information or data held or stored in any removable storage 
medium.
(c) introduces or causes to be introduced any computer contaminant or 
computer virus.
(d) damages or causes to be damaged any computer or computer 
system or network, data, computer database or any other computer 
program.
(e) disrupts or causes disruption of any computer system or computer 
network.
(f) denies or causes the denial of access any person authorized to 
access.
(g) provides any assistance to any person to facilitate access to a 
computer system or computer network in contravention of the 
provisions of this Act.
(h) charges the services availed of by a person to the account of 
another person by tampering or manipulating any computer, system 
or network

(i)
destroys, deletes or alters any information residing in a computer 
resource or diminishes its value or utility or affects it injuriously 
by any means;
(j) steal, conceals, destroys or alters or causes any person to steal, 
conceal, destroys or alter any computer source code used for a 
computer resource with an intention to cause damage, that person 
shall be liable to pay damages by way of compensation not 
exceeding one crorer rupees to the person so affected.
Section 43 thus provides for the explanation to the above Section 
which defines:
(i)
computer contaminant
(ii) computer database
(iii) computer virus
(iv) computer damage
(v) computer source code.

Compensation for Failure to Protect Data:
Where a body corporate, possessing, dealing or handling any sensitive 
personal data or information in a computer resource which it owns, 
controls and operates is negligent in implementing and maintaining 
reasonable security practices and procedures and thereby causes 
wrongful loss or wrongful gain to any person such body corporate 
shall be liable to pay damages by the way compensation to the 
person so affected. 
In Explanation to Section 43A of the IT Act provides for the 
definitions.
(i)
body corporate.
(ii) reasonable security practices and procedures.
(iii) sensitive personal data or information.

Penalty for Failure to Furnish Information, Return or any Other 
Penalty: If any person who is required under this Act or any rules 
or regulations made there under to:
(a)
furnish any document, return or report to the Controller or the 
Certifying Authority fails to furnish the same, he shall be liable to 
a penalty not exceeding one lakh and fifty thousand rupees for 
each such failure.
(b) file any return or furnish any information, books or other 
documents with in the time specified there for in the regulations 
fails to file return or furnish the same within the time specified 
there for in the regulations, he shall be liable to a penalty not 
exceeding five thousand rupees for everyday during which such 
failure continues.
(c) maintain books of account or records, fails to maintain the same, he 
shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding then ten thousand rupees 
for every day during which the failure continues.

Adjudication of Disputes under the IT Act:
The adjudication has been provided for
()
whether any person has committed a contravention of any of the 
provisions of this Act or of any rule, regulation, direction or order 
made there under which renders him liable to pay penalty or 
compensation the Central Government shall subject to provisions 
of sub-section (3),appoint any officer not below the rank of a 
Director to the Government of India or equivalent officer of a State 
Government to be an adjudicating officer for holding an enquiry in 
the manner prescribed by the Central Government. 
(1A)The adjudicating officer appointed under sub-section (1) shall 
exercise jurisdiction to adjudicate matters in which the claim for 
injury or damage does not exceed rupees five crore.
Every adjudicating officer shall have the powers of a civil court which 
areconferred on the Appellate Tribunal under the Sub-Section (2) 
of Section 58 ofthe IT Act.

a)
all proceeding before the adjudicating officer shall be deemed to 
be judicial proceedings within the meaning of Sections 193 and 
228 of the Indian Penal Code.
(b) and deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of Sections 345 and 
346 of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973.
(c) and shall also be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of 
Order XXI of the Civil Procedure Code.
The adjudicating officer adjudging quantum of compensation under 
Chapter IX of this Act shall have due regard to-
(a)
the amount of gain of unfair advantage, wherever quantifiable 
made as a result of the default.
(b) the amount of loss caused to any person as a result of the default.
(c) the repetitive nature of the default.

The Appellate Tribunal (AT):
Sections. 48 to 64 of Chapter X of IT Act contain the various 
provisions relating to appellate tribunal. 
It is significant to note that Cyber Appellate Tribunal the body which 
existed earlier under the Information Technology Act, 2000 has 
been merged with the Appellate Tribunal that is the Telecom 
Dispute Settlement and Appellate Tribunal (TDSAT) under the 
Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997 by Finance Act 
2017. 
Sections 49, 50, 51, 52, 52A, 52B, 52C,53, 54 and 56 of Chapter X of 
Information Technology Act have been omitted by Finance Act 
2017. 
Provisions relating to Appellate Tribunal are explained below:

The Appellate Tribunal Sec. 48(1):
The Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Tribunal 
established under Sec.14 of the Telecom Regulatory Authority 
of India Act, 1997, 
as per Part XIVof Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017, w.e.f. 
26/05/2017, be the Appellate Tribunal for the purposes of this 
Act and the said Appellate Tribunal shall exercise the 
jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred on it by or under 
this Act. 
The Central Government shall specify, by notification, the 
matters and places in relation to which the Appellate Tribunal 
may exercise jurisdiction.
(ii) The Appellate Tribunal (Qualifications, Experience and other 
Conditions of Service of Members) shall be as per the 
Appellate Tribunal Rules, 2017 (w.e.f.1/6/17).

Appeal to Appellate Tribunal (AT) (Sec. 57):
An appeal is a request made by the aggrieved party to modify or 
reverse an order, Appeals function both as a process for error 
correction and a process of clarifying and interpreting law. Any 
person aggrieved by an order made by controller or adjudicating 
officer under this Act may prefer an appeal to AT [Sec. 57(1)].
On receipt of an appeal under Section 57(1), the Appellate Tribunal 
may after giving an opportunity of being heard to the parties to the 
appeal pass such orders there on as it thinks fit. 
It may confirm, modify or set aside the order against which an appeal 
has been made [Sec. 57(4)). The Appellate Authority shall send a 
copy of every order made by it to: 
(i)
the parties to appeal, and (ii)the concerned controller or 
adjudicating officer [Sec. 57(5)]. The appeal shall be dealt with by 
it as expeditiously as possible and endeavor shall be made by it to 
dispose of the appeal finally within 6 months from the date of 
receipt of theappeal [Sec. 57(6)].

Procedure of AT [Sec. 58(1)]:
The Appellate Tribunal shall not be bound by the procedure laid down 
by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. However, it shall be guided 
by the principles of natural Justice and subject to the other 
provisions of this Act and of any rules the Appellate Tribunal shall 
have powers to regulate its own procedure including the place at 
which it shall have its sittings.
Powers of AT [Sec. 58(2)]:
The Appellate Tribunal shall have for the purposes of discharging its 
functions under this Act, the same powers as are vested in a Civil 
Court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. 
These are as follows:
(a)
summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and 
examining him on oath.
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents or other 
electronic records.
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits.

(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or 
documents.
(e) reviewing its decisions.
(f) dismissing an application for default or deciding it ex-parte.
(g) any other matter which may be prescribed.
Right to Make Legal Representation (Sec. 59):
The appellant may either appear in person or authorize one or more 
legal practitioners or any of its officers to present his or its case 
before the Appellate Tribunal.
Civil Court not to Have Jurisdiction (Sec. 61):
No Civil Court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or 
proceeding in respect of any matter which an adjudicating officer or 
the Appellate Tribunal is empowered to determine under this Act. 
No court shall grant injunction in respect of any action taken or to 
be taken in pursuance of any power conferred by or under this Act.

Appeal to High Court (Sec. 62):
Any person aggrieved by any decision or order of Appellate Tribunal 
may file an appeal to the High Court within 60 days from the date 
of communication of such decision or order. 
An appeal may be on any question of fact or law arising out of such 
order. The High Court may allow it to be filed within a further 
period of 60 days if it is satisfied that sufficient cause prevented 
him from filing the appeal with in the prescribed period.
Compounding of Contraventions and Recovery of Penalty or 
Compensation:
Any contravention under this Act either before or after the institution 
of Adjudication proceedings may be compounded by the Controller 
or any other officer who is specifically authorized by him or by the 
Adjudicating officer subject to such condition as the Controller or 
such other officer or the Adjudicating officer may specify: 
Provided that such sum shall not in any case, exceed the maximum 
amount of the penalty which may be imposed under this Act for

the contravention so compounded. However, the above proviso shall 
not apply to a person who commits the same or similar 
contravention within a period of three years from the date on 
which the first contravention, committed by him was 
Compounded.  
Any second or subsequent contravention committed after the expiry 
of a period of three years from the date on which the contravention 
was Previously compounded shall be deemed to be a first 
contravention. Moreover , no proceeding or further proceeding 
shall be taken against the person guilty of such contravention in 
respect of the contravention so compounded.
The word 'compound' used in this section means agreeing for 
considerations not to prosecute a person. Compounding an offence 
means abstaining from prosecuting the person of any offence or 
crime in question29. Moreover, according to the proviso of this 
section, the maximum amount of penalty or compensation which 
can be compoundable under this Act is Rupees one crore.  

Appeal to the High Court under the IT Act, and Judicial Review 
under the Constitution of India:
(i) Under the IT Act, any person aggrieved by any decision or order of 
the Appellate Tribunal may file an appeal to the High Court within 
sixty days from the date of communication of the decision or order 
of the Appellate Tribunal to him on any question of fact or law 
arising out of such order: Provided the High Court may, if it is 
satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from 
filing the appeal within the said period allow it to be filed within a 
further period not exceeding sixty days. This means that the High 
Court has been given the authority of second appeal as against the 
orders of the first appeal before the Appellate Tribunal under the IT 
Act. In the above provision of the IT Act, the expression 'sufficient‘ 
within the meaning of Section 5 of the Limitation Act, 1963 or 
Order 22, Rule9 of the CPC or any other similar provision should 
receive a liberal construction so as to advance substantial justice 
when no negligence or want of bona fides is imputable to a party. 

(ii) Under Article 226 of the Constitution of India every High Court 
shall have powers throughout the territories in relation to which it 
exercises jurisdiction to issue to any person or authority, including 
in appropriate cases, any Government, within those territories 
directions, orders or writs, including writs in the nature of 
mandamus, prohibition and certiorari in respect of any orders 
against the Controller or the Adjudicating officer or the Appellate 
Tribunal under this Act for the enforcement of any of the rights 
conferred by Part III and for any other purposes. 
The power conferred on a High Court by Article 226 of the 
Constitution shall not be in derogation of the power conferred on 
the Supreme Court by clause(2) of Article 32 of the Constitution 
33 The powers conferred upon the High Court under Article 226 of 
the Constitution are discretionary in nature which can be invoked 
for the enforcement of any fundamental right or legal right but not 
for more contractual rights arising out of an agreement particularly 
in view of the existence of efficacious alternative remedy. 

The Constitutional Court should insist upon the party to avail the same 
instead of invoking the extraordinary writ jurisdiction of the High 
Court.
It is emphasized by the Court that there is need to avoid arbitrariness by 
administrative authority in spheres where the relevant statute does not 
lay down any quasi judicial obligation. It has been held by the Court 
that the grounds for issuing writs of certiorari and prohibition are as 
under follows:
• 
Where there is a defect of jurisdiction it attracts certiorari. But certiorari 
would not lie because the decision of a tribunal on a subject matter within 
a jurisdiction is considered to be wrong.
• The principles of natural justice are not inflexible and may differ in 
different circumstances.
A writ of certiorari can be issued for correcting errors of jurisdiction 
committed by inferior courts or tribunals. A writ can be issued wherein 
exercise of jurisdiction conferred on it the court or tribunal acts illegally 
or improperly.

•
The writ of certiorari will be issued if there is an error of law apparent 
on the face of the record or if tribunal acts without sufficient evidence 
or misdirects itself in considering the evidence. 
•
A writ petition cannot succeed if its factual basis is not established. In 
a Calcutta case the petitioner sought inspection of his answer scripts at 
a particular examination on the ground that he had reason to believe 
that his answer scripts were missing. However, existence of the answer 
scripts was proved from the order of the Controller of Examinations. It 
was held that writ could not be issued.
(iii) 
Under Article 227 of the Constitution of India, every High Court shall 
have superintendence over all courts and tribunals throughout the territories 
in relation to which it exercises jurisdiction. Without prejudice to the 
generality of the foregoing provisions, the High Court may:
•
 call for returns from such courts;
•  make and issue general rules and prescribe forms for regulating the 
practice and proceedings of such courts; and
• prescribe forms in which books, entries and accounts shall be kept by the 
officers of any such courts

(iv) Under Article 32 of the Constitution of India the right to move the 
Supreme Court by appropriate proceedings for the enforcement of 
the remedies under this Article is guaranteed. 
The Supreme Court shall have the power to issue directions or orders 
or writs including writs in the nature of mandamus, prohibition and 
certiorari whichever may be appropriate for the enforcement of any 
of the right conferred by this Part.
A writ of certiorari may be issued by the Supreme Court where the law 
under which the decision was given is void. And a writ of certiorari 
may also be issued where a decision itself violates a fundamental 
right or the decision violates the law or is without jurisdiction. 
Moreover, a writ of certiorari can be issued by the Supreme Court 
where the decision is against natural justice, mala fide, perverse or 
based on non-applicability of a venue.
(v) Under Article 136 of the Constitution of India the Supreme Court 
may in its discretion, grant special leave to appeal from any 
Judgment, decree, determination, sentence or order in any case or

matter passed or made by any court or tribunal in the territory of India. 
Under this Article apart from above remedies discussed there can also 
be a special leave to appeal against the order or Judgment of the 
Appellate Tribunal under the Constitution of India. 
under Article 136 may be exercised against an order passed by any 
tribunal. This jurisdiction is not subject to any condition that the 
party who seeks special leave of the Supreme Court to appeal from 
such order is to exhaust all his remedies including petition under 
Article 226.
The Supreme Court would not allow a new point (which was not taken 
or not pressed before the High Court) to be raised before it or which 
was sought to be introduced by filing additional grounds. Where the 
point could have been urged before the High Court under Articles 
226 or 227, the Supreme Court would not permit the appellant to 
raise it for the first time before it not to assail an undertaking given 
by him in the High Court. 

It has been held by the Supreme Court that where the judgment is 
tainted with serious legal infirmities or is founded on a legal 
construction which is wrong, the special leave may be granted. Also 
it has been held by the Supreme Court that a petition for special 
leave would be granted where approach of the court whose 
judgment is under appeal is wrong in law.